The coordinator should keep the proposed shared wrapper, but strengthen its queue acceptance cases.
The current controls establish unticketed atomic composition and isolated ticket fairness separately.
They do not establish their combination or the full queue profile.

Evidence and scope

The source is TxModel.lean in docs/research/2026-10-05-claude-lead/tx-probes/.
Declaration anchors below refer to namespace TxModel in that file.
The model imports no Effect4 declaration and explicitly excludes fibers, interruption, and signal delivery.
Its saved output is (137257, true), from depth six over the seven entries of bodies.
Those entries include scalar take, offer at capacity one, transfer, and takeEither.
They contain no enlist, serve, cancellation, or capacity-zero offer.
attemptWith drives that exploration; it repeats the core rule of attempt rather than calling it.
No Lean or production runtime was run in this review.
Python 3.13.14 passes 22 assertions on finite mirrors, controls, and one explicit cancellation extension.

1. Fair atomic composition needs a defined ticket-enrollment protocol.

Anchors: enlist, serve, ticketTrace, transfer, transferTrace, attempt.
Plan: transactions-and-clock.md F5, F6 pattern 2, proposal 6.

The note correctly calls pattern 2 a candidate and says no queue serving both uses exists yet.
This is a material acceptance gap, not a refutation of a completed implementation.

First witness: placing enrollment inside the retrying body loses arrival order.
P attempts enlist(ticketCell,P) followed by serve(emptyQueue,ticketCell,P).
It retries, so attempt discards its ticket write.
Q runs the same body later; it also retries with no committed ticket.
An offer writes 10 and signals both requests.
If Q retries first, Q enrolls and consumes 10 before P.
The complete trace has four attempts and no cancellation.

The existing ticketTrace avoids this by committing enlist in a separate attempt.
That separate commit is part of the fairness protocol, not an ordinary retrying body.

Second witness: separately committed tickets can create a cycle across two ready queues.
Queues A and B hold [10] and [20].
P enrolls on A, Q on B, P on B, and Q on A.
The ticket cells become A:[P,Q] and B:[Q,P].
P atomically serves A then B; its tentative first service succeeds, but B has Q first.
P retries, restoring A's message and its ticket.
Q atomically serves B then A; A still has P first, so Q also retries and restores B.
Both payloads and all tickets remain. Neither attempt commits or signals a waiter.
Reevaluating either body still retries, so the model's quiet predicate accepts this blocked state.
That does not contradict quiet; quiet is not a progress property.

Positive control: commit each request's two enrollments together, in the same order on both queues.
P then serves both queues in one successful attempt and receives [10,20].

Smallest plan correction: retain transferTrace as unticketed composition evidence.
Before claiming one fair queue definition serves both uses, test both witnesses above.
Specify enrollment scope, identity, rollback, and the admitted composition order.
If coordination of enrollment is required, state that condition rather than assuming arbitrary composition.

2. The current queue bodies do not implement capacity-zero rendezvous.

Anchors: offer, take, queueTrace, bodies.
Plan: F5's queue instance versus the queues review's admitted capacity-zero profile.

Trace: take an empty queue; offer 10 at capacity zero; retry the take.
Both requests wait on the same unchanged cell, and no step signals either one.
The predicate in offer is length >= cap, so capacity zero always chooses retry.
Generic read-set registration introduces no pending-offer value that take can consume.

Positive control: capacity one lets the offer commit, signal the take, and deliver 10.

Smallest plan correction: state positive capacity as the current queue-instance domain.
For capacity zero, retain a separate pending-offer protocol and its acknowledgment/cancellation contract,
or explicitly reject that configuration in this candidate.
This does not show that transactions cannot express rendezvous; these two bodies do not express it.

3. Ticket cleanup is additional state beyond generic retry deregistration.

Anchors: World.waiting, attempt, enlist, serve, ticketTrace.
Plan: F6 pattern 1 and F8's shared cleanup contract.

Interruption is explicitly excluded from TxModel; no current cancellation declaration is defective.
The following is a hypothetical extension that removes only a request from World.waiting.

P commits its ticket and waits on an empty queue, then that cancellation removes its generic waiter.
Q commits a later ticket and attempts serve, which reads only the ticket cell and retries.
An offer writes 10 to the queue cell. It cannot signal Q, whose head ticket is still P.
Q retries and remains blocked beside the buffered message.

Positive control: remove P's ticket by a committed transaction.
The ticket-cell write signals Q, and its next attempt consumes 10.

Smallest plan correction: the wrapper contract must account for committed object enrollment,
or restrict its cleanup claim to bodies without such enrollment.
Test cancellation between enrollment and the first serve attempt, and after signalling but before retry.
Do not generalize the model's absent interruption semantics into one completed cleanup law.

4. orElse passes the stronger rollback and dependency controls.

Anchors: orElse, Acc, get, put, eitherTrace, attempt.

Initial store: source [5], full target [8], outer cell [].
Write [99] to the outer cell before entering orElse.
The left branch tentatively takes 5, then retries when offering to the full target.
The right branch reads the source.
Observed result: [5]; final store [[5],[8],[99]]; only the outer cell is committed as written.
The read dependency set retains both queues and the outer cell.
A planted mutant that runs the right branch on the left's modified store returns [] and loses 5.
The detector distinguishes that mutant from the inspected implementation.

When both alternative takes retry, the wait set contains both queue cells.
Writing either cell signals the request in separate positive checks.
No orElse defect was found in this tested fragment.
The original eitherTrace did not test left-branch writes before retry; this control does.

Meaning of the generic claim

The snapshot law needs complete read tracking: all store-dependent behavior uses the recorded footprint.
TxM is represented as Acc -> Step, so the finite model does not enforce that discipline by its type.
The inspected bodies use get and put, which record their accesses.
The planned admission/representation must retain that premise before claiming the law for any body.
No universal wrapper theorem, cancellation theorem, fairness theorem, or production reachability result follows here.

Reproduction

Command: python3 /private/tmp/codex-effect4-overnight-monitor/2026-10-05-transactions-task-review/model/probes.py
Exit: 0
Output: {"checks_passed": 22, "python": "3.13.14", "source_sha256": "118299d69bc31765d8aa28b72398cda6c87b3e5534b159cdd46f259984f6e588", "source_unchanged_during_run": true}
The executable holds exact inputs; results.json retains each state, reply, read/write set, and signal.
TxModel.snapshot.lean and TxModel.snapshot.out retain the inspected source and recorded output.
The live source was rechecked before delivery; recheck.json records the result.
