--- PDF page 1 ---
JFP 18 (4): 423–436, 2008. c⃝ 2008 Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S0956796808006758 First published online 18 March 2008 Printed in the United Kingdom
423
FUNCTIONAL PEARL
Data types `al ac a r t e
WOUTER SWIERSTRA
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Jubilee Campus, Nottingham, NG8 1BB
(e-mail: wss@cs.nott.ac.uk)
Abstract
This paper describes a technique for assembling both data types and functions from isolated
individual components. We also explore how the same technology can be used to combine
free monads and, as a result, structure Haskell’s monolithic IO monad.
1 Introduction
Implementing an evaluator for simple arithmetic expressions in Haskell is entirely
straightforward.
data Expr = Val Int | Add Expr Expr
eval :: Expr → Int
eval (Val x )= x
eval (Add x y )= eval x + eval y
Once we have chosen our data type, we are free to deﬁne new functions over
expressions. For instance, we might want to render an expression as a string:
render :: Expr → String
render (Val x )= show x
render (Add x y )= "(" ++ render x ++ "+" ++ render y ++ ")"
If we want to add new operators to our expression language, such as multiplication,
we are on a bit of a sticky wicket. While we could extend our data type for
expressions, this will require additional cases for the functions we have deﬁned so
far. Phil Wadler (1998) has dubbed this in the Expression Problem:
The goal is to deﬁne a data type by cases, where one can add new cases to the data type
and new functions over the data type, without recompiling existing code, and while retaining
static type safety.
As the above example illustrates, Haskell can cope quite nicely with new function
deﬁnitions; adding new constructors, however, forces us to modify existing code.
In this paper, we will examine one way to address the Expression Problem in
Haskell. Using the techniques we present, you can deﬁne data types, functions, and
even certain monads in a modular fashion.

--- PDF page 2 ---
424 W . Swierstra
2 Fixing the expression problem
What should the data type for expressions be? If we ﬁx the constructors in advance,
we will run into the same problems as before. Rather than choose any particular
constructors, we parameterize the expression data type as follows:
data Expr f = In (f (Expr f ))
You may want to think of the type parameterf as the signature of the constructors.
Intuitively, the type constructor f takes a type parameter corresponding to the
expressions that occur as the subtrees of constructors. The Expr data type then ties
the recursive knot, replacing the argument of f with Expr f .
The Expr data type is best understood by studying some examples. For instance,
if we wanted expressions that consisted of integers only, we could write:
data Val e = Val Int
type IntExpr = Expr Val
The only valid expressions would then have the formIn (Val x ) for some integer x.
The Val data type does not use its type parameter e, as the constructor does not
have any expressions as subtrees.
Similarly, we might be interested in expressions consisting only of addition:
data Add e = Add e e
type AddExpr = Expr Add
In contrast to the Val constructor, the Add constructor does use its type parameter.
Addition is a binary operation; correspondingly, the Add constructor takes two
arguments of type e.
Neither values nor addition are particularly interesting in isolation. The big
challenge, of course, is to combine the ValExpr and AddExpr types somehow.
The key idea is to combine expressions by taking the coproduct of their signatures.
The coproduct of two signatures is straightforward to deﬁne in Haskell. It is very
similar to the Either data type; the only diﬀerence is that it does not combine two
base types, but two type constructors.
data (f :+: g) e = Inl (fe
) | Inr (ge )
An expression of type Expr (Val :+: Add) is either a value or the sum of two such
expressions; it is isomorphic to the original Expr data type in the introduction.
Combining data types using the coproduct of their signatures comes at a price.
It becomes much more cumbersome to write expressions. Even a simple addition of
two numbers becomes an unwholesome jumble of constructors:
addExample :: Expr (Val :+: Add)
addExample = In (Inr (Add (In (Inl (Val 118))) (In (Inl (Val 1219)))))
Obviously, writing such expressions by hand is simply not an option. Furthermore,
if we choose to extend our expression language even further by constructing larger
coproducts, we will need to update any values we have written: the injections Inl

--- PDF page 3 ---
Functional pearl 425
and Inr may no longer be the right injection into the coproduct. Before we deal with
these problems, however, we consider the more pressing issue of how to evaluate
such expressions.
3 Evaluation
The ﬁrst observation we make, is that the types we deﬁned to form the signatures
of an Expr are both functors.
instance Functor Val where
fmap f (Val x )= Val x
instance Functor Add where
fmap f (Add e
1 e2)= Add (f e1)( f e2)
Furthermore, the coproduct of two functors, is itself a functor.
instance (Functor f , Functor g ) ⇒ Functor (f :+: g) where
fmap f (Inl e1)= Inl (fmap f e1)
fmap f (Inr e2)= Inr (fmap f e2)
These are crucial observations. If f is a functor, we can fold over any value of type
Expr f as follows:
foldExpr :: Functor f ⇒ (fa → a) → Expr f → a
foldExpr f (In t )= f (fmap (foldExpr f ) t)
This fold generalizes the folds for lists that you may know already. The ﬁrst argument
of the fold is called an algebra. An algebra of type fa → a determines how the
diﬀerent constructors of a data type aﬀect the ﬁnal outcome: it speciﬁes one step
of recursion, turning a value of type fa into the desired result a. The fold itself
uniformly applies these operations to an entire expression.
Using Haskell’s type class system, we can deﬁne and assemble algebras in a
modular fashion. We begin by introducing a separate class corresponding to the
algebra we aim to deﬁne.
class Functor f ⇒ Eval f where
evalAlgebra :: fI n t → Int
The result of evaluation should be an integer; this is reﬂected in our choice of
algebra. As we want to evaluate expressions consisting of values and addition, we
need to deﬁne the following two instances:
instance Eval Val where
evalAlgebra (Val x )= x
instance Eval Add where
evalAlgebra (Add x y )= x + y
These instances correspond exactly to the cases from our original deﬁnition of
evaluation in the introduction. In the case for addition, the variables x and y are
not expressions, but the result of a recursive call.

--- PDF page 4 ---
426 W . Swierstra
Last of all, we also need to evaluate composite functors built from coproducts.
Deﬁning an algebra for the coproductf :+: g boils down to deﬁning an algebra for
the individual functors f and g.
instance (Eval f , Eval g ) ⇒ Eval (f :+: g) where
evalAlgebra (Inl x )= evalAlgebra x
evalAlgebra (Inr y )= evalAlgebra y
With all these ingredients in place, we can ﬁnally deﬁne evaluation by folding over
an expression with the algebra we have deﬁned above.
eval :: Eval f ⇒ Expr f → Int
eval expr = foldExpr evalAlgebra expr
Using eval we can indeed evaluate simple expressions.
Main⟩ eval addExample
1337
Although we can now deﬁne functions over expressions using folds, actually
writing expressions such as addExample, is still rather impractical to say the least.
Fortunately, we can automate most of the overhead introduced by coproducts.
4 Automating injections
The deﬁnition ofaddExample illustrates how messy expressions can easily become. In
this section, we remedy the situation by introducing smart constructors for addition
and values.
As a ﬁrst attempt, we might try writing:
val :: Int → Expr Val
val x = In (Val x )
inﬁxl 6 ⊕
(⊕ ): : Expr Add → Expr Add → Expr Add
x ⊕ y = In (Add x y )
While this is certainly a step in the right direction, writingval 1⊕ val 3 will result in a
type error. The smart constructor add expects two expressions that must themselves
solely consist of additions, rather than values.
We need our smart constructors to be more general. We will deﬁne smart
constructors with the following types:
(⊕ ): :( Add :≺ : f ) ⇒ Expr f → Expr f → Expr f
val :: (Val :≺ : f ) ⇒ Int → Expr f
You may want to read the type constraint Add :≺ : f as ‘any signature f that
supports addition.’

--- PDF page 5 ---
Functional pearl 427
The constraint sub :≺ : sup should only be satisﬁed if there is some injection from
sub a to sup a . Rather than write the injections using Inr and Inl by hand, the
injections will be inferred using this type class.
class (Functor sub , Functor sup ) ⇒ sub :≺ : sup where
inj :: sub a → sup a
The (:≺ :) class only has three instances. These instances are not Haskell 98, as there
is some overlap between the second and third instance deﬁnition. Later on, we will
see why this should not result in any unexpected behavior.
instance Functor f ⇒ f :≺ : f where
inj = id
instance (Functor f , Functor g ) ⇒ f :≺ :( f :+: g) where
inj = Inl
instance (Functor f , Functor g , Functor h , f :≺ : g) ⇒ f :≺ :( h :+: g) where
inj = Inr ◦ inj
The ﬁrst instance states that (:
≺ :) is reﬂexive. The second instance explains how to
inject any value of type fa to a value of type (f :+: g) a, regardless of g. The third
instance asserts that provided we can inject a value of typefa into one of type ga ,
we can also inject fa into a larger type (h :+: g) a by composing the ﬁrst injection
with an additional Inr.
We use coproducts in a list-like fashion: the third instance only searches through
the right-hand side of coproduct. Although this simpliﬁes the search—we never
perform any backtracking—it may fail to ﬁnd an injection, even if one does exists.
For example, the following constraint will not be satisﬁed:
f :≺ :( (f :+: g): + :h)
Yet clearly Inl ◦ Inl would be a suitable candidate injection. Users should never
encounter these limitations, provided their coproducts are not explicitly nested. By
declaring the type constructor (:+:) to be right-associative, types such asf :+: g :+: h
are parsed in a suitable fashion.
Using this type class, we deﬁne our smart constructors as follows:
inject :: (g :≺ : f ) ⇒ g (Expr f ) → Expr f
inject = In ◦ inj
val :: (Val :≺ : f ) ⇒ Int → Expr f
val x = inject (Val x )
(⊕ ): :( Add :≺ : f
) ⇒ Expr f → Expr f → Expr f
x ⊕ y = inject (Add x y )
Now we can easily construct and evaluate expressions:
Main⟩ let x :: Expr (Add :+: Val)= val 30000 ⊕ val 1330 ⊕ val 7
Main⟩ eval x
31337

--- PDF page 6 ---
428 W . Swierstra
The type signature of x is very important! We exploit the type signature to ﬁgure
out the injection into a coproduct: if we fail to provide the type signature, a compiler
has no hope whatsoever of guessing the right injection.
As we mentioned previously, there is some overlap between the instances of the
(:≺ :) class. Consider the following example:
inVal :: Int → Expr (Val :+: Val)
inVal i = inject (Val i )
Which injection should be inferred,Inl or Inr? There is no reason to prefer one over
the other—both choices are justiﬁed by the above instance deﬁnitions. The functions
we present here, however, do not inspect where something occurs in a coproduct.
Indeed, we can readily check that eval (In (Inl (Val x ))) and eval (In (Inr (Val x )))
are equal for all integers x as the instance of the Eval class for coproducts does
not distinguish between Inl and Inr. In other words, the result of eval will never
depend on the choice of injection. Although we need to allow overlapping instances
to compile this class, it should only result in unpredictable behavior if you abuse
the information you have about the order of the constructors of an expression.
5 Examples
So far we have done quite some work to write code equivalent to the evaluation
function deﬁned in introduction. It is now time to reap the rewards of our investment.
How much eﬀort is it to add multiplication to our little expression language? We
begin by deﬁning a new type and its corresponding functor instance.
data Mul x = Mul x x
instance Functor Mul where
fmap f (Mul x y )= Mul (fx )( fy )
Next, we deﬁne how to evaluate multiplication and add a smart constructor.
instance Eval Mul where
evalAlgebra (Mul x y )= x ∗ y
inﬁxl 7 ⊗
(⊗ ): :(
Mul :≺ : f ) ⇒ Expr f → Expr f → Expr f
x ⊗ y = inject (Mul x y )
With these pieces in place, we can evaluate expressions with multiplication:
Main⟩ let x :: Expr (Val :+: Add :+: Mul)= val 80 ⊗ val 5 ⊕ val 4
Main⟩ eval x
404
Main⟩ let y :: Expr (Val :+: Mul)= val 6 ⊗ val 7
Main⟩ eval y
42
As the second example illustrates, we can also write and evaluate expressions of
type Expr (Val :+: Mul), thereby leaving out addition. In fact, once we have a menu

--- PDF page 7 ---
Functional pearl 429
of expression building blocks, we can assemble our own data types `al ac a r t e. This
is not even possible with proposed language extensions for open data types (L¨oh &
Hinze, 2006).
Adding new functions is not very diﬃcult. As a second example, we show how
to render an expression as a string. Instead of writing this as a fold, we give an
example of how to write open-ended functions using recursion directly.
We begin by introducing a class, corresponding to the function we want to write.
An obvious candidate for this class is:
class Render f where
render :: f (Expr f ) → String
T h et y p eo frender, however, is not general enough. To see this, consider the
instance deﬁnition for Add. We would like to make recursive calls to the subtrees,
which themselves might be values, for instance. The above type forrender, however,
requires that all subtrees ofAdd are themselves additions. Clearly this is undesirable.
A better choice for the type of render is:
class Render f where
render :: Render g ⇒ f (Expr g ) → String
This more general type allows us to make recursive calls to any subexpressions of
an addition, even if these subexpressions are not additions themselves.
Assuming we have deﬁned instances of the Render class, we can write a function
that calls render to pretty print an expression.
pretty :: Render f ⇒ Expr f → String
pretty (In t )= render t
All that remains, is to deﬁne the desired instances of the Render class. These
instances closely resemble the original render function deﬁned in the introduction;
there should be no surprises here.
instance Render Val where
render (Val i )= show i
instance Render Add where
render (Add x y )= "(" ++ pretty x ++ "+" +
+ pretty y ++ ")"
instance Render Mul where
render (Mul x y )= "(" ++ pretty x ++ "*" ++ pretty y ++ ")"
instance (Render f , Render g ) ⇒ Render (f :+: g) where
render (Inl x )= render x
render (Inr y )= render y
Sure enough, we can now pretty-print our expressions:
Main⟩ let x :: Expr (Val :+: Add :+: Mul)= val 80 ⊗ val 5 ⊕ val 4
Main⟩ pretty x
"((80 * 5) + 4)"

--- PDF page 8 ---
430 W . Swierstra
Finally, it is interesting to note that theinj function of the (:≺ :) class has a partial
inverse. We could have deﬁned the (:≺ :) class as follows:
class (Functor sub , Functor sup ) ⇒ sub :≺ : sup where
inj :: sub a → sup a
prj :: sup a → Maybe (sub a )
The prj function is straightforward to deﬁne for the three instances of the (: ≺ :)
class deﬁned above. When writing complex pattern matches on expressions, the prj
function is particularly useful. For example, we may want to rewrite expressions,
distributing multiplication over addition. To do so, we would need to know if one
of the children of a Mul constructor is an Add. Using the Maybe monad and prj
function, we can try to apply the distributive law on the outermost constructors of
an expression as follows:
match :: (g :≺ : f ) ⇒ Expr f → Maybe (g (Expr f ))
match (In t )= prj t
distr :: (Add :≺ : f , Mul :≺ : f ) ⇒ Expr f → Maybe (Expr f )
distr t = do
Mul a b ← match t
Add c d ← match b
return (a ⊗ c ⊕ a ⊗ d)
Using the distr function, one can deﬁne an algebra to fold over an expression,
applying distributivity uniformly wherever possible, rather than just inspecting the
outermost constructor.
These examples illustrate how we can add both new functions and new con-
structors to our types, without having to modify existing code. Interestingly, this
approach is not limited to data types: we can also use the same techniques to
combine a certain class of monads.
6 Monads for free
Most modern calculators are capable of much more than evaluating simple arith-
metic expressions. Besides various other numeric and trigonometric operations,
calculators typically have a memory cell storing a single number. Pure functional
programming languages, such as Haskell, encapsulate such mutable state using
monads. Despite all their virtues, however, monads are notoriously diﬃcult to
combine. Can we extend our approach to combine monads using coproducts?
In general, the coproduct of two monads is fairly complicated (L ¨uth & Ghani,
2002). We choose to restrict ourself to monads of the following form:
data Term f a =
Pure a
| Impure (f (Term f a ))

--- PDF page 9 ---
Functional pearl 431
These monads consist of either pure values or an impure eﬀect, constructed using
f . When f is a functor, Term f is a monad. This is illustrated by the following two
instance deﬁnitions.
instance Functor f ⇒ Functor (Term f ) where
fmap f (Pure x )= Pure (fx )
fmap f (Impure t )= Impure (fmap (fmap f ) t)
instance Functor f ⇒ Monad (Term f ) where
return x = Pure x
(Pure x ) >>= f = fx
(Impure t ) >>= f = Impure (fmap (>>=f ) t)
These monads are known as free monads (Awodey, 2006).
Several monads you may already be familiar with are free monads. Consider the
following types:
data Zero a
data One a = One
data Const e a = Const e
Now Term Zero is the identity monad;Term One corresponds to the Maybe monad;
and Term (Const e ) is the error monad. Most monads, however, are not free monads.
Notable examples of monads that are not free include the list monad and the state
monad.
In general, a structure is called free when it is left-adjoint to a forgetful functor.
In this speciﬁc instance, the Term data type is a higher-order functor that maps
a functor f to the monad Term f ; this is illustrated by the above two instance
deﬁnitions. This Term functor is left-adjoint to the forgetful functor from monads
to their underlying functors.
All left-adjoint functors preserve coproducts. In particular, computing the co-
product of two free monads reduces to computing the coproduct of their underlying
functors, which is exactly what we achieved in Section 2. Throughout this section,
we will exploit this property to deﬁne monads modularly.
Although the state monad is not a free monad, we can use the Term data type to
represent a language of stateful computations. We can incrementally construct these
terms and interpret them as computations in the state monad.
We will consider simple calculators that are equipped with three buttons for
modifying the memory:
Recall The memory can be accessed using the recall button. Pressing the recall
button returns the current number stored in memory.
Increment You can add an integer to the number currently stored in memory using
the M+ button. To avoid confusion with the coproduct, we will refer to this
button as Incr.
Clear Finally, the memory can be reset to zero using a Clear button.
We will implement the ﬁrst two operations, leaving Clear as an exercise.

--- PDF page 10 ---
432 W . Swierstra
Once again, we deﬁne types Incr and Recall corresponding to the operations we
wish to introduce. TheIncr constructor takes two arguments: the integer with which
to increment the memory, and the rest of the computation. The Recall constructor
takes a single, functional argument that expects to receive the contents of the
memory cell. Given the contents, it will continue with the rest of the computation.
Both these types are obviously functors.
data Incr t = Incr Int t
data Recall t = Recall (Int → t)
To facilitate writing such terms, we introduce another series of smart constructors,
analogous to the smart constructors we have seen for expressions.
inject :: (g :≺ : f ) ⇒ g (Term f a ) → Term f a
inject = Impure ◦ inj
incr :: (Incr :≺ : f ) ⇒ Int → Term f ()
incr i = inject (Incr i (Pure ()))
recall :: (Recall :≺ : f ) ⇒ Term f Int
recall = inject (Recall Pure )
Using Haskell’sdo-notation, we can construct complex terms quite succinctly. For
instance, the tick term below increments the number stored in memory and returns
its previous value.
tick :: Term (Recall :+: Incr)
Int
tick = do y ← recall
incr 1
return y
Note that we could equally well have given tick the following, more general type:
(Recall :≺ : f , Incr :≺ : f ) ⇒ Term f Int
There is a clear choice here. We could choose to let tick work in any Term that
supports these two operations; or we could want to explicitly state that tick should
only work in the Term (Recall :+: Incr)m o n a d .
In order to write functions over terms, we deﬁne the following fold:
foldTerm :: Functor f ⇒ (a → b) → (fb → b) → Term f a → b
foldTerm pure imp (Pure x )= pure x
foldTerm pure imp (Impure t )= imp (fmap (foldTerm pure imp ) t)
The ﬁrst argument, pure, is applied to pure values; the case for impure terms closely
resembles the fold over expressions.
To execute our terms, we must still deﬁne a suitable algebra to pass to the
foldTerm function. It is not immediately obvious what the type of our algebra
should be. Clearly, we will need to keep track of the state of our memory cell. To
avoid any confusion with other integer values, we introduce a separate data type

--- PDF page 11 ---
Functional pearl 433
that represents the contents of the memory cell:
newtype Mem = Mem Int
To interpret our terms in the state monad, we aim to deﬁne arun function with the
following type:
run :: ... ⇒ Term f a → Mem → (a, Mem)
The run function should take a term and initial state of the memory, and execute
the term, returning a result value of type a and the ﬁnal state of the memory cell.
As we wish to deﬁne run as a fold, this determines the type of our algebra and
motivates the following class deﬁnition:
class Functor f ⇒ Run f where
runAlgebra :: f (Mem → (a, Mem)) → (Mem → (a, Mem))
We can now write suitable instances for Incr, Recall, and coproducts.
instance Run Incr where
runAlgebra (Incr k r )( Mem i )= r (Mem (i + k))
instance Run Recall where
runAlgebra (Recall r )( Mem i )= ri (Mem i )
instance (Run f , Run g ) ⇒ Run (f :+: g) where
runAlgebra (Inl r )= runAlgebra r
runAlgebra (Inr r )= runAlgebra r
In the case for Incr we increment the memory cell and continue recursively; for
Recall we lookup the value stored in memory, but leave the state of the memory
unchanged; the instance deﬁnition for coproducts should be familiar.
Using the fold over terms and the above algebra, we deﬁne the run function. In
the base case, we simply tuple the memory and value being returned—in a similar
fashion to the return of the state monad. For theImpure case, we use the runAlgebra
we have deﬁned above.
run :: Run f ⇒ Term f a → Mem → (a, Mem)
run = foldTerm ( ,) runAlgebra
Using run we can execute our tick function as follows:
Main⟩ run tick (Mem 4)
(4, Mem 5)
We could have written out functions incr and recall directly in the state monad
Mem → (a, Mem). What have we gained by the extra indirection introduced by the
Term data type? Looking at thetype of our terms, we can now say something about
their behavior. For example, any term of type Term Recall Int will never modify
the state of the memory cell; dually, any term of type Term Incr a will produce the
same result, regardless of the initial state of the memory cell. If we had just written
functions in the state monad directly, we could not have distinguish these special
kinds of computations.

--- PDF page 12 ---
434 W . Swierstra
As was the case for expressions, we can extend our terms with new operations,
allowing us to assemble monads modularly. It is important to emphasize that this
technique for combining monads does not generalize all Haskell’s monads—free
monads are a special case that we can deal with quite nicely.
7 Applications
For all its beauty, Haskell does have its less appealing aspects. In particular, the IO
monad has evolved into a ‘sin bin’ that encapsulates every kind of side eﬀect from
addFinalizer to zeroMemory. With the technology presented in the previous sections,
we can be much more speciﬁc about what kind of eﬀects certain expressions may
have.
Consider the following two data types, describing two classes of IO operation
from the Haskell prelude:
data Teletype a =
GetChar (Char → a)
| PutChar Char a
data FileSystem a =
ReadFile FilePath (String → a)
| WriteFile FilePath String a
We can execute terms constructed using these types by calling the corresponding
primitive functions from the Haskell Prelude. To do so, we deﬁne a function exec
that takes pure terms to their corresponding impure programs.
exec :: Exec f ⇒ Term f a → IO a
exec = foldTerm return execAlgebra
The execAlgebra merely gives the correspondence between our constructors and the
Prelude. Note that we qualify the IO functions imported from the Prelude to avoid
name clashes.
class Functor f ⇒ Exec f where
execAlgebra :: f (IO a ) → IO a
instance Exec Teletype where
execAlgebra (GetChar f )= Prelude.getChar >>= f
execAlgebra (PutChar c io )= Prelude.putChar c >> io
The instance deﬁnitions for FileSystem and coproducts have been omitted; they
are entirely unremarkable. Provided we deﬁne smart constructors as before, we can
write pseudo-IO programs without any syntactic overhead beyond the obligatory
type signature:
cat :: FilePath → Term (Teletype
:+: FileSystem)( )
cat fp = do
contents ← readFile fp
mapM putChar contents
return ()

--- PDF page 13 ---
Functional pearl 435
N o wt h et y p eo fcat tells us exactly what kind of eﬀects it uses: a much healthier
situation than a single monolithic IO monad. For example, our types guarantee
that executing a term in the Term Teletype monad will not overwrite any ﬁles on
our hard disk. The types of our terms actually have something to say about their
behavior! An additional advantage of this two-step approach is that the terms we
write are pure Haskell values—information we can exploit if we are interested in
debugging or reasoning about eﬀectful functions (Swierstra & Altenkirch, 2007).
8 Discussion
There are many interesting topics that I have not covered. While we have encountered
the fold over a data type, I have not mentioned the unfold. Furthermore, we have
not dealt with polymorphic data types, such as lists or trees. Such data types can
also be written using the techniques described above. Rather unsurprisingly, this
requires a shift from functors to bifunctors.
This approach does have its limitations. Although GADTs and nested data types
can also be expressed as initial algebras (Johann & Ghani, 2007; Johann & Ghani,
2008), doing so requires a higher-order representation of data types that can be a bit
cumbersome to program with in Haskell. Furthermore, modular functions that take
diﬀerent types of modular arguments and return modular data types will require
multi-parameter type classes and several other extensions to Haskell 98. It would be
interesting to explore the limits of this approach further.
Much of the code presented here is part of the functional programming folklore.
The ﬁxed-points of functors and their corresponding folds have been introduced to
the functional programming community more than ﬁfteen years ago (Meijer et al. ,
1991). More recently, Tim Sheard (2001) has proposed using ﬁxed-points of functors
to write modular code. Free monads are well understood in category theory, but are
much less widespread in the functional programming community. The (:≺ :) class is
an obvious generalization of existing work on modular interpreters (Liang et al. ,
1995). Yet, amazingly, no one has ever put all these pieces together.
I am sure there are many, many other ways to achieve results very similar to
ones presented here. Haskell’s type class system, along with its various dubious
extensions, is open to all kinds of abuse. I doubt, however, there is a simpler, more
tasteful solution.
Acknowledgments
Most of this work is the result of many entertaining and educational discussions with
my colleagues at the University of Nottingham, for which I would like to express
my sincere gratitude. Mauro Jaskelioﬀ, Conor McBride, and Nicolas Oury deserve a
particular mention for their ideas and encouragement. Thorsten Altenkirch, George
Giorgidze, and Andres L ¨oh all provided valuable feedback on a draft version of
this paper. Last but not least, I would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for the
helpful comments I received.

--- PDF page 14 ---
436 W . Swierstra
References
Awodey, S. (2006) Category Theory. Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 49. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Johann, P. & Ghani, N. (2007) Initial algebra semantics is enough! Typed Lambda Calculi
and Applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4583. Springer.
Johann, P. & Ghani, N. (2008) Foundations for structured programming with GADTs. In
Conference record of the ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages. San Francisco, California, pp. 297–308.
Liang, S., Hudak, P. & Jones, M. (1995) Monad transformers and modular interpreters. In
Conference record of the ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages. San Francisco, California, pp. 333–343.
L¨oh, A. & Hinze, R. (2006) Open data types and open functions. Princ. Prac. Declarative
Program. Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of
Declarative Programming. Venice, Italy, pp. 133–144.
L¨uth, C. & Ghani, N. (2002) Composing monads using coproducts. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming . Pittsburgh, PA,
pp. 133–144.
Meijer, E., Fokkinga, M. & Paterson, R. (1991) Functional programming with bananas, lenses,
envelopes and barbed wire. In Proceedings ACM Conference on Functional Programming
Languages and Computer Architecture .
Sheard, T. (2001) Generic uniﬁcation via two-level types and parameterized modules. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming .
Florence, Italy, pp. 86–97.
Swierstra, W. & Altenkirch, T. (2007) Beauty in the beast: A functional semantics of
the awkward squad. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Haskell Workshop . Freiburg,
Germany, pp. 25–36.
Wadler, P. (1998). The Expression Problem. Accessed at http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/
wadler/papers/expression/expression.txt