--- PDF page 1 ---
Logical Methods in Computer Science
Volume 20, Issue 4, 2024, pp. 17:1–17:50
https://lmcs.episciences.org/
Submitted Apr. 24, 2023
Published Nov. 22, 2024
A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS
ROGER BOSMAN∗ a, BIRTHE VAN DEN BERG∗ a, WENHAO TANG∗ b,
AND TOM SCHRIJVERS a
a KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200A, Belgium
e-mail address: {roger.bosman/birthe.vandenberg/tom.schrijvers}@kuleuven.be
b The University of Edinburgh, 10 Crichton Street, United Kingdom
e-mail address: wenhao.tang@ed.ac.uk
Abstract. Algebraic effects & handlers have become a standard approach for side-effects
in functional programming. Their modular composition between different effects and clean
separation of syntax and semantics make them attractive to a wide audience. However,
not all effects can be classified as algebraic; some need a more sophisticated handling.
In particular, effects that have or create a delimited scope need special care, as their
continuation consists of two parts—in and out of the scope—and their modular composition
introduces additional complexity. These effects are called scoped and have gained attention
by their growing applicability and adoption in popular libraries. While calculi have been
designed with algebraic effects & handlers built in to facilitate their use, a calculus that
supports scoped effects & handlers in a similar manner does not yet exist. This work fills
this gap: we present λsc, a calculus with native support for both algebraic and scoped effects
& handlers. The most novel part of λsc is the support for modular composition of different
scoped effects & handlers by extending handlers with forwarding clauses, which make λsc
much more expressive than existing calculi with algebraic effects & handlers. Our calculus
is based on Eff, an existing calculus for algebraic effects, extended with Koka-style row
polymorphism, and consists of a formal grammar, operational semantics, and a (type-safe)
type-and-effect system. We give a prototype implementation of λsc with type inference
and demonstrate λsc on a range of examples.
1. Introduction
While monads [ Mog89, Mog91, Wad95] have long been the go-to approach for modelling
effects, algebraic effects & handlers [PP03, PP09] are steadily gaining more traction. They
offer a more structured and modular approach to composing effects, based on an algebraic
model. The approach consists of two parts: effects denote the syntax of operations, and
handlers interpret them by means of structural recursion. By composing handlers that
each interpret only a part of the syntax in the desired order, one can modularly build an
interpretation for the entire program. Algebraic effects & handlers have been adopted in
Key words and phrases: algebraic effects, scoped effects, calculus, operational semantics, type- and effect
system.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
LOGICAL METHODS
lIN COMPUTER SCIENCE DOI:10.46298/LMCS-20(4:17)2024
© R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. T ang, and T . Schrijvers
CC⃝ Creative Commons

--- PDF page 2 ---
17:2 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
several libraries (e.g., fused-effects [ RTWS18], extensible-effects [ KSSF19], Eff in OCaml
[KS18]) and languages (e.g., Eff [Pre15], Links [HL16], Koka [Lei17], Effekt [BSO20]).
Although the modular approach of algebraic effects & handlers is desirable for every
effectful program, it is not always applicable. In particular, those effects that have or
introduce a delimited scope (e.g., exceptions, concurrency, local state) are not algebraic.
Essentially, these so-called scoped effects [WSH14] split the program into two: a part in the
scope of the effect (called the scoped computation) and a part out of the scope (called the
continuation).
This separation breaks algebraicity, which states that operations commute with sequenc-
ing. Modeling scoped effects as handlers [ PP03] has been proposed as a way of encoding
scoped effects in an algebraic framework. However, this comes at the cost of modularity
[YPW+22] (and thus expressiveness). Wu et al. proposes to treat scoped effects as separate,
built-in operations, and present their solution in a denotational setting. However, their
solution of modular composition of scoped handlers is rather ad-hoc, and not a generalization
of the algebraic case. Therefore, a treatment of scoped effects & handlers in an operational
setting with full support for modular composition is desirable. The growing interest in
scoped effects & handlers, evidenced by their adoption at GitHub [ TRWS22] and in Haskell
libraries (e.g., eff [ Kin19], polysemy [Mag19], fused-effects [RTWS18]), motivates the need
for such a calculus, all the more because they use the same ad-hoc approach of modular
composition as suggested by Wu et al.
This paper aims to fill this gap in the literature: we cover scoped effects & handlers,
which in previous work has only been covered in a denotational setting, in an operational
setting by presenting λsc, a calculus with scoped effects & handlers. Our main source of
inspiration is Eff [BP13, BP15, Pre15], a calculus for algebraic effects & handlers, effectively
easing programming with those features. Although Eff is an appropriate starting point, the
extension to support scoped effects & handlers is non-trivial, for two reasons. First, scoped
effects require polymorphic handlers, which we support by let-polymorphism and Fω-style
type operators. Second, we need to be able to forward unknown operations in order to keep
the desired modularity. Whereas algebraic effects & handlers have a uniform (and implicit)
forwarding mechanism, scoped effects & handlers need explicit forwarding clauses in order
to allow sufficient freedom in their implementation.
In what follows, after introducing the appropriate background (Section 2) and informally
motivating the challenges and design choices of our calculus (Section 3), we formalize λsc.
We make the following contributions:
• We present our solution for the modular composition of scoped handlers, called forwarding
(Section 3.3), and generalize it later (Section 7).
• We design formal syntax for λsc terms, types and contexts (Section 4).
• We provide an operational semantics (Section 5).
• We define a type-and-effect system for λsc (Section 6).
• We formulate and prove λsc’s metatheoretical properties (Section 8).
• We show the usability of our calculus on a range of examples (Section 9).
• We provide an interpreter of our calculus with type inference in which we implement all
our examples (supplementary material).

--- PDF page 3 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:3
2. Background & Motivation
This section provides the necessary background and motivates our goal. We review algebraic
effects & handlers as a modular approach to composing side-effects in effectful programs.
Next, we present scoped effects & handlers : effects that have or create a delimited scope
(such as once for nondeterminism [PSWJ18, WSH14]), and motivate the need for a calculus
with built-in support for these scoped effects.
2.1. Algebraic effects & handlers. Algebraic effects & handlers consist of operations,
denoting their syntax, and handlers, denoting their semantics. This separation gives us
modular composition, which has intrinsic value and allows controlling effect interaction.
2.1.1. Algebraic Operations. Effects are denoted by a name (or label) and characterized by a
signature A _ B, taking a value of type A and producing a value of type B. For example,
choose : () _ Bool takes a unit value and produces a boolean (e.g., nondeterministically).
Operations invoke effects, combining the op keyword, an effect to invoke, a parameter
passed to the effect, and a continuation, containing the rest of the program. For brevity of
presentation, we follow the syntax of Eff [ Pre15] to have an explicit continuation for every
operation.
cND1 = op choose () (b . if b then return 1 else return 2)
In accordance with its signature, choose is passed (), and in the supplied contination b has
type Bool. As a result, cND1 is a computation that returns either 1 or 2.
Some operations commute with sequencing. For example:
do x ← op choose () (b . if b then return 1 else return 2) ;return x 2
≡ op choose () (b . do x ← if b then return 1 else return 2 ;return x 2)
This equivalence is an instance of the algebraicity property, and operations are algebraic
if they satisfy this property. Algebraicity states that the sequencing of a computation c2
after an operation op ℓ v (y . c1) is equivalent to sequencing the same computation after the
continuation of this operation:
do x ← op ℓ v (y . c1) ;c2 ≡ op ℓ v (y . do x ← c1 ; c2
2.1.2. Handlers. Handlers give meaning to operations. For example, handler hND interprets
choose by collecting all the choices in a list:
hND = handler {return x 7→ return [x ]
, op choose k 7→ do xs ← k true ; do ys ← k false ; xs + +ys }
This handler has two clauses. The first clause returns a singleton list in case a value x is
returned. The second clause, which interprets choose, executes both branches by applying
the continuation k to both true and false, and concatenates their resulting lists with the
(+ +)-operator. We applyhND to cND1 to obtain both of its results:
with hND handle cND1
⇝∗ [1, 2]

--- PDF page 4 ---
17:4 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
The algebraicity property plays a critical role in giving semantics to algebraic effects
and handlers. For example, consider the following program which uses hND to handle a
computation that sequences two choose operations using the do syntax.
cND2 = do p ← op choose () (b . return b) ;op choose () (q . return (p, q))
In order to handle the first choose operation, the handler hND needs to get access to the
continuation of it. Thus, we use the algebraicity property of choose to put the second
choose operation in the explicit continuation of the first choose operation.
with hND handle cND2
⇝ with hND handle op choose () (b .
do p ← return b ; op choose () (q . return (p, q)))
⇝∗ [(true, true), (true, false), (false, true), (false, false)]
Algebraic effects & handlers bring several interesting advantages. Most interestingly,
their separation of syntax and semantics allows a modular composition of different effects,
which in turn allows for altering the meaning of a program by different effect interactions.
For those familiar with the category-theoretical backings of folds, handler application
can be seen as a fold over an abstract syntax tree, where operations are nodes in that tree,
and handlers are the fold algebra. The result type of the fold is the carrier of the algebra.
2.1.3. Modular Composition. Effects can be composed by combining different primitive
operations. For example, computation cc,g below uses get : () _ String in addition to
choose.
cc,g = op choose () (b . if b then return 1 else op get () (x . return x))
Instead of having to write a handler for each combination of effects, algebraic effects &
handlers allow us to write a handler specific for the effect get, and to compose it with the
existing handler hND.
hget = handler {return x 7→ return x , op get k 7→ k 2}
When composing handlers with hND handle (with hget handle cc,g), hget is applied first,
and handles get. Since hget does not contain a clause for choose, it leaves (we say“forwards”,
see below) the choose operation to be handled by another handler. This forwarding behavior
is key to the modular reuse and composition of handlers. Handler hND then takes care of
the remaining effects.
with hND handle (with hget handle cc,g)
⇝∗ with hND handle cND1
⇝∗ [1, 2]
2.1.4. Forwarding. Critical to modular composition is the possibility to apply partial handlers,
i.e. to apply handlers to computations where the handlers may only handle a subset of the
effects present in the computations. As discussed in Section 2.1.2, handler application can
be seen as a fold, where handlers form the folding algebra. Therefore, the partial algebra
formed by partial handlers must be supplemented by a forwarding algebra that interprets
the effects not handled by the handler such that they can be handled by another handler.
Generally, calculi for algebraic effects require that handler clauses leave computations as
their output. The forwarding algebra must “reinterpret” computations into computations,

--- PDF page 5 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:5
which is essentially the identity function. Therefore, for these calculi, forwarding can be and
is done uniformly, which means handlers do not need to give specialised forwarding clauses
for effects they do not handle. For example, choose is forwarded by hget by simply leaving
the effect with the handled computation.
with hget handle op choose () (b . return b)
⇝ op choose () (b . with hget handle return b)
In the calculus we will present we cannot forward generically, and instead utilize explicit
forwarding clauses. This is not novel: it already shows up in the algebraic case when
generalizing handler clauses when they may return types that are not computations. Since
the return type of handlers corresponds to the carrier of the fold, when generalizing handler
clauses like this we get a fold with a carrier type that is not a computation. In this case,
we can no longer uniformly forward the unhandled operations. Instead, we must specify,
per carrier, how to forward unhandled operations by means of an explicit forwarding clause
[SPWJ19]. Requirement of explicit forwarding algebras for algebraic effects and handlers
often happens in libraries, but not in languages, because languages with primitive support
for algebraic effects and handlers always require the carriers of handlers to be computations.
As stated, in the case of scoped effects, we are required to specify such an explicit
forwarding clause even when the carrier is a computation. For now, we would like to observe
that this forwarding clause is not a consequence of implementing scoped effects, but merely
a consequence of moving away from a (very specific) instance of algebraic effects.
2.1.5. Effect Interaction. One of the valuable features of the modular composition of algebraic
effects & handlers is that effects can interact differently by applying their handlers in a
different order. Consider the effect inc : () _ Int, which produces an (incremented) integer.
The handler hinc turns computations into state-passing functions.
hinc = handler {return x 7→ return (λs . return (x , s))
, op inc k 7→ return (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;
do k ′ ← k s ′ ;
k ′ s ′)}
The state s represents the current counter value. On every occurrence of inc, the incremented
value is passed to the continuation twice: (1) for updating the counter value and (2) for
returning the result of the operation. The latter is for the continuation and the former for
serving the next inc operation. We use the folowing syntactic sugar:
runinc s c ≡ do c′ ← with hinc handle c ; c′ s
The computation cinc combines choose and inc:
cinc = op choose () (b . if b then op inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2))
When handling inc first, each choose branch gets the same initial counter value 0.
with hND handle runinc 0 cinc
⇝∗ with hND handle op choose () (b .
do p′ ← if b then with hinc handle (op inc () (x . x + 5))
else with hinc handle (op inc () (y . y + 2)) ;
p′ 0)
⇝∗ [(6, 1), (3, 1)]

--- PDF page 6 ---
17:6 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
In contrast, when handling choose first, the counter value is threaded through the successive
branches, showing that with algebraic effects & handlers, the manner in which effects interact
can be controlled by the order in which handlers are applied.
runinc 0 (with hND handle cinc)
⇝∗ runinc 0 (do xs ← with hND handle op inc () (x . x + 5) ;
do ys ← with hND handle op inc () (y . y + 2) ;
return xs + +ys)
⇝∗ ([6, 4], 2)
2.2. Scoped effects. Not all effects are algebraic. There is a wide class of higher-order
effects [BS24] which do not satisfy the algebraicity property including scoped effects [WSH14],
latent effects [BSPW21], and parallel effects [ XJMP21]. In this paper, we focus on scoped
effects. Consider extending nondeterminism with an effect that takes a computation that
contains nondeterministic choice and returns only its first result. This is known as the once
operation [PSWJ18]. Since effect operations syntactically already receive the continuation as
and argument, which looks like a computation, we might be tempted to use it for this purpose,
i.e. to use it to denote the scope of once. Subscripting ✗ to indicate an erroneous example,
we could attempt to syntactically write this as the algebraic operation once✗ : () _ () by
extending hND with a clause for once✗ that executes the continuation, and then takes the
head of the result if possible. Otherwise it just returns the empty list. We then try to prune
the first choose of cND2 by using once.
honce✗ = handler {. . . ,op once✗ k 7→ do ts ← k () ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;
if b then return [ ] else head ts }
conce✗ = do p ← op once✗ () ( . op choose () (b . return b)) ;
op choose () (q . return (p, q))
We intend for with honce✗ handle conce✗ to return [( true, true), (true, false)] as the first
choose is pruned by once✗ to only return the first alternative. The second choose is out of
scope of once✗, so should still return both results. However, algebraicity pulls the second
choose inside the scope of once✗:
with honce✗ handle (do p ← op once✗ () ( . op choose () (b . return b)) ;
op choose () (q . return (p, q)))
⇝ with honce✗ handle once✗ () ( . do op choose () (b . return b) ;
op choose () (q . return (p, q)))
⇝∗ [(true, true)]
There are many more examples of operations that have a scope; some of which we present
in Section 9:
• catch for catching exceptions that are raised during program execution;
• local for creating local variables (local state);
• call for creating a scope in a nondeterministic program, where branches can be cut using
the algebraic cut operation;
• depth for bounding the depth in the depth-bounded search strategy;

--- PDF page 7 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:7
Following Wu et al. [WSH14], we call them scoped operations. Plotkin and Power [PP03] have
already realised that algebraic effects are unable to represent so-called effect deconstructors
(e.g. scoped effects) and propose to model them as handlers. Although this solution is used
(for example by Thompson et al. [ TRWS22]), it merges syntax and semantics at the cost
of modularity [WSH14, YPW+22]. In Section 9 we revisit this issue, showing attempts at
encoding scoped effects as handlers, their problems, and how λsc remedies the situation.
The goal of this work is to implement scoped effects while maintaining a separation
between syntax and semantics, and thus preserve modular composition and control over effect
interaction. It follows a line of research [ PSWJ18, WSH14, YPW+22] that has developed
denotational semantic domains, backed by categorical models. However, they did not consider
the modular composition of scoped effects and handlers in their denotional semantics. What
is lacking from the literature is a calculus that allows programming with both algebraic and
scoped operations and their handlers as well as supports the modular composition between
them.
3. Design Decisions & Challenges
This section informally discusses the design of λsc, a novel calculus with support for scoped
effects & handlers as built-in features. We present the main challenges and design choices,
and address how to forward unknown operations.
3.1. Scoped Effects as Built-in Operations. λsc supports scoped effects as built-in
operations, signalled by the sc keyword.
sc once () (y . c1) (z . c2)
Like algebraic operations, scoped operations feature a label once to identify the effect, a
parameter, in this case (), and a continuation ( z . c2). However, unlike algebraic operations,
scoped operations feature an additional scoped computation (y . c1). For once, the scoped
computation entails the computation to be restricted to the first result (i.e. the computation
in scope). The result from the scoped computation c1 is passed to the continuation c2 by
means of argument z.
Scoped handler clauses feature an additional argument when compared to algebraic
handler clauses, corresponding to the scoped computation. For example, below we define a
handler for once, which extends hND.
honce = handler { . . . ,sc once p k 7→ do ts ← p () ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;
if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; k t }
Adding scoped operations gives rise to a variant of the algebraicity property, which models
the desired behavior of sequencing for scoped operations: scoped operations commute with
sequencing in the continuation, but leave the scoped computation intact.
do x ← sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ;c3 ≡ sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . do x ← c2 ; c3)
Using once as a scoped operation correctly restrict only the first choose, as can be seen
when applying honce to conce, which is like conce✗ defined in Section 2.2 but with the scoped
effect once instead of the algebraic effect once✗.

--- PDF page 8 ---
17:8 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
conce = sc once () ( . op choose () (b . return b))
(p . do q ← op choose () (b . return b) ;return (p, q))
with honce handle conce ⇝∗ [(true, true), (true, false)]
Signatures. Scoped effects, like algebraic effects, have signatures A _ B. Like algebraic
effects, the left-hand side of this signature refers to the type of the value passed to the
operation (() in the case of once). However, where the right-hand side of the signature in
the case of algebraic effects refers to the argument of the continuation, in the case of scoped
effects it refers to the scoped computation. Whilst this may seem strange from this point of
view, it makes sense from the point of view of writing handler clauses: in both cases, a value
of type A is given, and a value of type B is produced by the handler clause. The difference
comes from what computation this produced value of type B is passed to: algebraic effect
handler clauses pass this value to the continuation, whereas scoped effect handler clauses
pass this value to the scoped computation (whose result is passed to the continuation).
Therefore, the signature of once is () _ () since the handler clause calls the scoped com-
putation with (). The scoped result type (Section 3.3) varies depending on the computation
once is applied to, and is therefore not a part of the signature.
3.2. Eff with Row Typing. Our calculus is based on Eff [ Pre15, BP13, BP15], an existing
calculus for algebraic effects & handlers. However, instead of using the subtyping-based effect
system of Eff, we use a row-based effect system in the style of Koka [ Lei17] for simplicity.
Therefore, computations have types of shape A ! ⟨E ⟩, where A is the type of the value
returned by the computation, and E is a collection (row) of effects that may occur during
its evaluation. For example, ( Bool, Bool)! ⟨choose, once⟩ is the type of conce.
Handler types, of shape A ! ⟨E ⟩ ⇒ B ! ⟨F ⟩, reflect that handlers turn one computation
(of type A ! ⟨E ⟩) into another (of type B ! ⟨F ⟩). For example, honce handles choose and once.
honce : (Bool, Bool) ! ⟨choose, once⟩ ⇒ List (Bool, Bool) ! ⟨⟩
3.3. Scoped result type. As we have seen before, the two computations taken by a scoped
operation sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) are not just two irrelevant terms; they are connected in
the sense that the result of the scoped computation y . c1 is passed to the continuation
z . c2 and exactly bound as z in c2. Therefore, they must agree on the type of this result,
which we name the scoped result type . For example, consider conce with overall type
(Bool, Bool)! ⟨once ; choose⟩. Its scoped result type is (a singular) Bool: it is the type that
is produced by the scoped computation, and consumed by the continuation.
sc once () ( . op choose () (b . return b)| {z }
()→ Bool ! ⟨once ;choose⟩
) (p . do q ← op . . . return (p, q)| {z }
Bool →(Bool,Bool) !⟨once ;choose⟩
)
Dealing with the presence of this scoped result type is the most non-trivial part for designing
a calculus with composable scoped effects. There are two main complications. First, since
the type does not occur in the computation’s overall type, polymorphic handlers are required
to handle scoped effects. Second, the scoped result type describes a dependency between the
scoped computation and continuation: if one changes its type, the other must match this.
This makes generic forwarding impossible: it alters the type of the scoped computation, but
does not make up for it in the continuation.

--- PDF page 9 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:9
The rest of this section covers these two complications. While understanding these
issues is important for fully understanding the semantics presented in Section 5, it may
be hard to fully comprehend the remainder section without having seen the type system
presented in Section 6. We recommend the reader to skim over parts of the remainder of
this section that are unclear, and revisit them after having seen the type system.
3.3.1. Polymorphic Handlers. Applying a handler to a computation involves recursively
applying the handler to the computation’s subcomputations as well. In the case of algebraic
effects, these subcomputations always have the same type as the operation itself, as witnessed
by the algebraicity property. This means that calculi that only support algebraic effects
& handlers, such as Eff, allow typing handlers monomorphically, without limitations in
expressivity.
However, typing scoped effect handlers monomorphically does limit their implementation
freedom: it only allows scoped operations of which the scoped result type matches the
operation’s overall type. For example, consider the type ( Bool, Bool)! ⟨choose ; once⟩ ⇒
List (Bool, Bool)! ⟨⟩ we previously assigned to honce. This monomorphic type requires the
scoped result type to be ( Bool, Bool) as well, as it is the only type of computation monomor-
phic honce can handle. This is not the case for conce: as established, its scoped result type is
Bool. Therefore, scoped computations such as conce, cannot be handled by monomorphic
handlers. The solution is to let handlers abstract over the value type of computations,
allowing for the handling of scoped operations with any scoped result type. This way, honce
can be typed as follows:
honce : ∀ α . α! ⟨choose ; once⟩ ⇒ List α! ⟨⟩
With this polymorphic typing in place, with honce handle conce can now be evaluated
by polymorphic recursion. To support this, λsc features let-polymorphism, Fω-style type
operators, and requires all handlers for scoped effects to be polymorphic.
3.3.2. Forwarding Unknown Operations. In order to retain the modularity of composing
different effects, as discussed in Section 2.1.4, we allow for partial handlers (i.e. handlers
that handle only a subset of the effects they are applied to) to obtain dedicated handlers
that interpret only their part of the syntax. This requires that all remaining operations be
forwarded to other handlers. As established, this forwarding can, in the case for algebraic
effects and in some specific situations, be done in a canonical way.
One might hope to forward scoped effects in a similar way, where the inner computations
are handled, and the effect is left as-is for future handlers to handle. For example, consider
the following computation which uses a scoped operation catch : String _ Bool for catching
exceptions.
ccatch = sc catch "err" (b . if b then return 1 else return 2) (x . return x)
with honce handle ccatch
Applying the handler honce to it gives us
⇝✗ sc catch "err" (b . with honce handle if b . . .) (x . with honce handle return x)

--- PDF page 10 ---
17:10 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Unfortunately, this does not work: again, the hurdle is in the scoped result type, in
combination with the fact that applying a handler to a computation changes its type. In
our example, honce applies the type operator List when handling a computation, resulting in
a handled scoped computation of type Bool → List Int ! ⟨catch⟩, and a handled continuation
of type Int → List Int ! ⟨catch⟩.
sc catch "err" (b . with honce handle if b then . . .| {z }
Bool→ List Int ! ⟨catch⟩
) (x . with honce handle return x| {z }
Int →List Int ! ⟨catch⟩
)
This introduced a type mismatch, as the return type of the scoped computation has changed
(List Int), whereas the continuation still expects the original type ( Int). In other words: the
scoped computation and continuation no longer agree on a scoped result type. Thus, scoped
effects cannot be forwarded uniformly. Therefore, we require that every handler is equipped
with an explicit forwarding clause for unknown scoped operations, specific to the handler’s
carrier (i.e. the type constructor is applied to a computation when handled). This forwarding
clause is used to resolve the type mismatch between the result type of the handled scoped
computation and the parameter type of continuation.
Considering the above example, the goal of applying a function of type Int → List Int ! ⟨E ⟩
to a value of type List Int naturally reminds us of monadic binding. Indeed, for most carriers,
this forwarding clause is very similar to that of the monadic bind > >=. In fact, for now we
will assume this to be the case for all effects, and introduce λsc based on these bind-like
forwarding clauses. In Section 7 we will revisit this firstly by giving examples where bind-like
clauses are not expressive enough, secondly by generalizing the forwarding clause, and lastly
by showing how to desugar bind-like clauses to generalized forwarding clauses. Therefore,
forwarding clauses are—for now—of shape bind x k , where x represents the result of the
scoped computation, and k represents the continuation, yielding a type similar to > >=.
What should we write for a forwarding clause? The answer depends on what we expect
when we want to connect the results of a handler to outside. For example, consider the
handler h Once. The x here is the list of results we get from the nondeterministic program
in the scope after handled by honce. The k here is what remains to do for each result. The
most intuitive way to connect x and k is to run k on every element in x and connect their
results together. This is exactly what the concatMap function in Haskell does.
honce = handler { . . . ,bind x k 7→ concatMap x k }
We define concatMap in λsc as follows.
concatMap : ∀ α β µ . List β →µ (β →µ List α) →µ List α
concatMap [ ] f = return [ ]
concatMap (b : bs) f = do as ← f b ; as ′ ← concatMap bs f ; as + +as ′
Note that there is no unique correct forwarding clause for every handler; it is up to the
programmers to decide which kind of forwarding behaviours they want. For example, for
honce we can also use a reversed version of concatMap which does the same thing except
for traversing the list from right to left. Alternatively, we can only pass the first element
of x to k, or even invoke other effects like printing some information when forwarding.
Comparing these different styles of forwarding, we prefer the original version using a left-to-
right concatMap since we usually do not want other scoped effects to unexpectedly change
the results of honce by discarding some results or reversing the order of results. From our

--- PDF page 11 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:11
values v ::= () | (v1, v2) | x | λx . c | h
handlers h ::= handler {return x 7→ cr return clause
, oprs effect clauses
, bind x k 7→ cf } forwarding clause
operation clauses oprs ::= · empty oprs
| op ℓop x k 7→ c, oprs algebraic effect clauses
| sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, oprs scoped effect clauses
computations c ::= return v return value
| op ℓop v (y . c) algebraic operation
| sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) scoped operation
| with v handle c handle
| do x ← c1 ; c2 do-statement
| v1 v2 application
| let x = v in c let
Figure 1: Terms of λsc.
experience of implementing a range of examples of scoped effects in Section 9, we found that
a simple and intuitive forwarding clause usually yields the expect semantics.
In what follows, we put our calculus on formal footing, discussing its syntax, operational
semantics and type-and-effect system.
4. Term Syntax
As stated, λsc is based on Eff [ BP13, BP15]. Before adding support for scoped effects, we
have altered Eff from its presentation in [ BP13, BP15] in two ways. Firstly, we have made a
number of cosmetic changes that arguably improve the readability of the calculus. Secondly,
we adopt row-based typing in the style of Koka [ Lei17]. The row types will be introduced in
Section 6.
Like Eff we implement fine-grained call-by-value semantics [ LPT03]. Therefore, terms
are split into inert values and computations that can be reduced.
4.1. Computations. For computations, return can be used to return values. Handlers
can be applied to values with the with and handle keywords. As seen before, computations
may be sequenced by means of do-statements ( do x ← c1 ; c2). Applications reduce, so
they are computations. As discussed in Section 3.3.1, to support polymorphic handlers
we support let-polymorphism and thus let-bindings. Finally, a computation may be the
invocation of an effect by means of an operation.
To be able to differentiate between algebraic and scoped effects, we add the effect
keyword sc to model scoped effects. Consequently, op now ranges over algebraic effects only.
Furthermore, we annotate labels with either op or sc to indicate if they are the label of an
algebraic or scoped effect, respectively. We implicitly assume any label ℓ occurs either as an
algebraic or scoped effect label. Like their algebraic counterparts, scoped effect operations
feature a label ℓsc, argument v and continuation (z . c2). In addition, scoped effect operations
feature a scoped computation ( y . c1). This way, the scope of effect ℓsc is delimited: (scoped)
computation (y . c1) is in scope, continuation ( z . c2) is not.

--- PDF page 12 ---
17:12 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
4.2. Values. Values consist of the unit value (), value pairs ( v1, v2), variables x, functions
λx . c and handlers h. Handlers h have three kinds of clauses: one return clause, zero or
more operation clauses, and a forwarding clause.
The return clause return x 7→ c denotes that the result x of a computation is processed
by computation c.
Algebraic operation clauses op ℓop x k 7→ c specify that handling an effect with label
ℓop, parameter x and continuation k is processed by computation c (e.g., hND, hget, hinc). For
scoped effect clauses the extension is analogous to the operation case: we take the algebraic
clause and add support for a scoped computation, which in the case for the clause has the
form of parameter p.
Finally, as motivated in Section 3.3.2, we have forwarding clauses of shape bind x k 7→ c
that deal with forwarding unknown scoped operations with some label ℓsc. We will generalize
these in Section 7.
5. Operational Semantics
Figure 2 displays the small-step operational semantics of λsc. Here, relation c ⇝ c′ denotes
that computation c steps to computation c′, with ⇝∗ its reflexive, transitive closure. The
highlighted rules deal with the extensions that support scoped effects. The following
discussion of the semantics is exemplified by snippets of derivations of computations 1 used
in Section 2. We refer to Appendix A for the full version of these derivations.
Rules E-AppAbs and E-Let deal with function application and let-binding, respectively,
and are standard. The rest of the rules consist of two parts: sequencing and handling.
Sequencing. For sequencing computations do x ← c1 ; c2, we distinguish between the
situation where c1 can take a step ( E-Do), and where c1 is in normal form ( return, op, or
sc). First, if c1 returns a value v, we substitute v for x in c2 (E-DoRet). Second, if c1 is an
algebraic operation, we rewrite the computation using the algebraicity property ( E-DoOp),
bubbling up the algebraic operation to the front of the computation. Third, the new case,
where c1 is a scoped operation, is analogous: the generalization of the algebraicity property
(Section 3.1) is used to rewrite the computation ( E-DoSc).
Handling. For handling computations with a handler of the form with h handle c, we
distinguish six situations. First, if possible, c takes a step ( E-Hand); in the other cases, c
is in normal form. If c returns a value v, we use the handler’s return clause return x 7→ cr,
switching evaluation to cr with x replaced by v (E-HandRet).
If computation c is an algebraic operation op ℓop v (y . c1), its label is looked up
in the handler h. If the handler contains an algebraic clause with this label, evaluation
switches to the clause’s computation c (E-HandOp), with v substituted for parameter x
and continuation k replaced by a function that, given the original argument y, contains
the already-handled2 continuation. For example, with hND handle cND1 (p. 3) reduces as
follows.
1Following convention, these examples may contain elements not present in our calculus, such as integers
and if-then-else statements. These may be viewed as syntactic sugar for their Church encodings.
2Like eff, λsc implements deep handlers, as opposed to shallow handlers.[HL18a]

--- PDF page 13 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:13
c ⇝ c′ Computation reduction
(λx . c) v ⇝ c [v / x ] E-AppAbs let x = v in c ⇝ c [v / x ] E-Let
c1 ⇝ c′
1
do x ← c1 ; c2 ⇝ do x ← c′
1 ; c2
E-Do do x ← return v ; c2 ⇝ c2 [v / x ] E-DoRet
do x ← op ℓop v (y . c1) ;c2 ⇝ op ℓop v (y . do x ← c1 ; c2) E-DoOp
do x ← sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ;c3 ⇝ sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . do x ← c2 ; c3) E-DoSc
c ⇝ c′
with h handle c ⇝ with h handle c′ E-Hand
(return x 7→ cr) ∈ h
with h handle return v ⇝ cr [v / x ] E-HandRet
(op ℓop x k 7→ c) ∈ h
with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) ⇝ c [v / x , (λy . with h handle c1) / k ] E-HandOp
(op ℓop ) /∈ h
with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) ⇝ op ℓop v (y . with h handle c1) E-FwdOp
(sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c) ∈ h
with h handle sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ⇝ c [v / x , (λy . with h handle c1) / p,
(λz . with h handle c2) / k ]
E-HandSc
(sc ℓsc ) /∈ h (bind x k 7→ c) ∈ h
with h handle sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ⇝ sc ℓsc v (y . with h handle c1) (z . c [z / x ,
(λz . with h handle c2) / k ])
E-Bind
Figure 2: Operational semantics of λsc.
with hND handle cND1
⇝ do xs ← (λb . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) true
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) false
xs + +ys
⇝∗ return [1, 2]
In case h does not contain a clause for label ℓop, the effect is forwarded ( E-FwdOp).
Algebraic effects can be forwarded generically: we re-invoke the operation and recursively

--- PDF page 14 ---
17:14 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
apply the handler to continuation c1. For example, during the application of runinc in
with hND handle runinc 0 cinc (p. 5), choose is forwarded:
with hND handle runinc 0 cinc
⇝ with hND handle do p′ ← op choose () (b . with hinc handle if b then op inc ()
(x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2)) ;p′ 0
⇝∗ return [(6, 1), (3, 1)]
If computation c is a scoped operation sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2), we again distinguish two
situations: the case where h contains a clause for ℓsc, and where it does not. If h contains a
clause for label ℓsc, evaluation switches to the clause’s computation c (E-HandSc), with v
substituted for parameter x. Both the scoped computation and the continuation are replaced
by a function that contains the already-handled computations c1 and c2. For example, this
happens for the scoped operation once in with honce handle conce (p. 7).
with honce handle conce
⇝ do ts ← (λ . with honce handle op choose (b . return b)) ()
do t ← head ts
(λp . with honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝∗ return [(true, true), (true, false)]
When h does not contain a clause for label ℓsc, we must forward the effect. As we
showed in Section 3.3.2, forwarding scoped effects cannot happen canonically, but (for now)
rather proceeds via the handler’s forwarding clause bind x k 7→ c. Similar to the forwarding
of algebraic effects, we recursively handle the subcomputations. However, in the case of
bind, we set the continuation of the to-be-forwarded effect to the forwarding clause’s body
c, substituted with the relevant arguments.
For a computation, consider again the example described in Section 3.3.2. Even though
we have not given any semantics to catch yet (we will do so in Section 9.1), we know honce
does not contain a clause for catch. As described, catch must be forwarded, addressing the
type mismatch between the handled scoped computation and handled continuation with
concatMap.
with honce handle ccatch
⇝ sc catch "err" (b . with honce handle if b then return 1 else return 2)
(x . concatMap x (λz . with honce handle return z))
6. Type-and-Effect System
This section presents the type-and-effect system of λsc. As before, we distinguish between
values, computations and handlers.
6.1. Grammar. Figure 3 displays the grammar of the types of λsc. Like terms, types are
split: values have value types A, B, computations have computation types C, D. Value
types consist of the unit type (), pair types ( A, B), function types A → C, handler types
C ⇒ D, type variables α and abstraction over them λα . A, and type application M A .
Following convention and to allow for meaningful examples, we may add base value types to
the calculus, such as String, Int and Bool. Functions take a value of type A as argument and

--- PDF page 15 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:15
value types A, B, M ::= () | (A, B) | A → C | C ⇒ D
| α type variable
| λ α . A type operator abstraction
| M A type application
type schemes σ ::= A | ∀ µ . σ | ∀ α . σ
computation types C, D ::= A! ⟨E ⟩
effect rows E, F ::= · | µ | ℓ ; E
signature contexts Σ ::= · | Σ, ℓop : A _ B | Σ, ℓsc : A _ B
type contexts Γ ::= · | Γ, x : σ | Γ, µ | Γ, α
Figure 3: Types of λsc.
Γ ⊢ v : σ Value Typing
(x : σ) ∈ Γ
Γ ⊢ x : σ T-V ar Γ ⊢ () : () T-Unit
Γ ⊢ v1 : A Γ ⊢ v2 : B
Γ ⊢ (v1, v2) : (A, B) T-Pair
Γ, x : A ⊢ c : C
Γ ⊢ λx . c : A → C T-Abs
Γ ⊢ v : A A ≡ B
Γ ⊢ v : B T-EqV
Γ ⊢ v : ∀ α . σ Γ ⊢ A
Γ ⊢ v : [A / α] σ T-Inst
Γ, α ⊢ v : σ α / ∈ Γ
Γ ⊢ v : ∀ α . σ T-Gen
Γ ⊢ v : ∀ µ . σ Γ ⊢ E
Γ ⊢ v : [E / µ] σ T-InstEff
Γ, µ ⊢ v : σ µ / ∈ Γ
Γ ⊢ v : ∀ µ . σ T-GenEff
Figure 4: Value typing.
return a computation of type C; handlers take a computation of type C as argument and
return a computation of type D.
A computation type A!⟨E ⟩ consists of a value type A, representing the type of the
value the computation evaluates to, and an effect type E, representing the effects that may
be called during this evaluation. Different from Eff, we implement effect types as effect
rows using row polymorphism [ Lei05] in the style of Koka [ Lei17]. Therefore, rows E are
represented as collections of the previously discussed atomic labels ℓop and ℓsc, optionally
terminated by a row variable µ. Finally, we can abstract over both type and row variables,
giving rise to type schemes σ.
6.2. Value typing. Figure 4 displays the typing rules for values. Rules T-V ar, T-Unit,
T-Pair and T-Abs type variables, units, pairs and term abstractions, respectively, and are
standard.
Rule T-EqV expresses that typing holds up to equivalence of types. The full type
equivalence relation ( A ≡ B), which also uses the equivalence of rows ( E ≡⟨⟩ F), is
included in Appendix B. However, these relations can be described as the congruence closure

--- PDF page 16 ---
17:16 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Γ ⊢ c : C Computation Typing
Γ ⊢ v1 : A → C Γ ⊢ v2 : A
Γ ⊢ v1 v2 : C T-App
Γ ⊢ c1 : A! ⟨E ⟩ Γ, x : A ⊢ c2 : B ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ do x ← c1 ; c2 : B ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Do
Γ ⊢ c : C C ≡ D
Γ ⊢ c : D T-EqC
Γ ⊢ v : σ Γ, x : σ ⊢ c : C
Γ ⊢ let x = v in c : C T-Let
Γ ⊢ v : A Γ ⊢ E
Γ ⊢ return v : A! ⟨E ⟩ T-Ret
Γ ⊢ v : C ⇒ D Γ ⊢ c : C
Γ ⊢ with v handle c : D T-Hand
(ℓop : A1 _ A2) ∈ Σ Γ ⊢ v : A1 Γ, y : A2 ⊢ c : A3 ! ⟨E ⟩ ℓop ∈ E
Γ ⊢ op ℓop v (y . c) : A3 ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Op
(ℓsc : A1 _ A2) ∈ Σ
Γ ⊢ v : A1 Γ, y : A2 ⊢ c1 : A3 ! ⟨E ⟩ Γ, z : A3 ⊢ c2 : A4 ! ⟨E ⟩ ℓsc ∈ E
Γ ⊢ sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) : A4 ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Sc
Figure 5: Computation typing.
of the following two rules.
(λ α . A) B ≡ A [B / α] Q-AppAbs
ℓ1 ̸= ℓ2
ℓ1 ; ℓ2 ; E ≡⟨⟩ ℓ2 ; ℓ1 ; E R-Swap
Rule Q-AppAbs captures type application, following Fω, and R-Swap captures the insignif-
icance of the order in effect rows, following Koka’s row typing approach.
The final four value typing rules deal with generalization and instantiation of type
variables and row variables. Rule T-Inst instantiates the type variables α in a type scheme
with a value type A. Rule T-Gen is its dual, abstracting over a type variable. The rules
for row variables are similar: T-InstEff instantiates row variable with an effect row E;
T-GenEff abstracts over a row variable. The definition of well-scopedness for types Γ ⊢ σ
and effect rows Γ ⊢ E is straightforward (Appendix C).
6.3. Computation typing. Figure 5 shows the rules for computation typing. Rules T-App
and T-Do capture application and sequencing, and are standard. Like value typing, typing
of computations holds up to equivalence of types ( T-EqC). Rule T-Let is part of our
extension of Eff, as scoped effects require introducing let-polymorphism.
Rule T-Ret assigns a computation type to a return statement. This type consists of
the value v in the return, together with a effect row E. Notice that, as in Koka, this row
can be freely chosen.
Rule T-Hand types handler application. The typing rules for handlers and their clauses
are discussed in Section 6.4. A handler of type C ⇒ D denotes a handler that transforms
computations of type C to a computation of type D.
Rule T-Op types algebraic effects. Looking up label ℓop in Σ yields a signature A1 _ A2,
where A1 is the type of the operation’s parameter v, and A2 is the type of argument y of

--- PDF page 17 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:17
Γ ⊢ return x 7→ cr : C Γ ⊢ oprs : C Γ ⊢ bind x k 7→ cf : C
Handler clause typing
Γ, x : A 7→ cr : C
Γ ⊢ return x 7→ cr : C T-Return Γ ⊢ · : C T-Empty
Γ ⊢ oprs : C (ℓop : A1 _ A2) ∈ Σ
Γ, x : A1, k : A2 → C ⊢ c : C
Γ ⊢ op ℓop x k 7→ c, oprs : C T-OprOp
Γ ⊢ oprs : M A 1 ! ⟨E ⟩ (ℓsc : A2 _ A3) ∈ Σ
Γ, β, x : A2, p : A3 → M β ! ⟨E ⟩, k : β → M A 1 ! ⟨E ⟩ ⊢ c : M A 1 ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, oprs : M A 1 ! ⟨E ⟩ T-OprSc
Γ, α, x : M α, k : α → M A ! ⟨E ⟩ ⊢ cf : M A ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ bind x k 7→ cf : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Bind
Γ ⊢ h : ∀ α . α! ⟨E ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨F ⟩ Handler typing
T-HandlerBind
⟨F ⟩ ≡ ⟨⟩ ⟨labels (oprs) ;E ⟩ Γ, α ⊢ return x 7→ cr : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ, α ⊢ oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩ Γ, α ⊢ bind x k 7→ cf : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ handler {return x 7→ cr , oprs, bind x k 7→ cf } : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩
Figure 6: Handler typing.
the continuation. The resulting effect row includes ℓop. Indeed, ℓ ∈ E means that there is
some E ′ such that E ≡⟨⟩ ℓ ; E ′. Finally, the operation’s type equals that of continuation c.
Similarly, rule T-Sc types scoped effects. Again, looking up label ℓsc in Σ yields signature
Asc _ Bsc where Asc corresponds to the type of the operation’s parameter v. However,
where Bop in the algebraic case refers to the continuation’s argument, Bsc now describes the
scoped computation’s argument. This leaves the the scoped result type undescribed by the
signature, but as discussed in Section 3.3.1, this freedom is exactly what we want. As for
the effect rows, T-Sc requires the rows of the scoped computation to match.
6.4. Handler typing. The typing rules for handlers and handler clauses are shown in
Figure 6. They consist of four judgments. Judgment Γ ⊢ return x 7→ cr : M A !⟨E ⟩ types
return clauses, Γ ⊢ oprs :M A ! ⟨E ⟩ types operation clauses, and Γ ⊢ bind x k 7→ c :M A ! ⟨E ⟩
types forwarding clauses. Finally, Γ ⊢ h : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ types handlers, using the
first three judgments.
Return Clauses. Rule T-Return types return clauses of the form return x 7→ cr. It
binds variable x to type A, adds it to the context, and returns the type M A ! ⟨E ⟩ of cr as
the type of the return clause.

--- PDF page 18 ---
17:18 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Operation Clauses. The judgment Γ ⊢ oprs : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ denotes that all operations in the
sequence of operations oprs have type M A ! ⟨E ⟩. The base case T-Empty types the empty
sequence. The other two cases require the head of the sequence (either op or sc) to have
the same type as the tail.
Rule T-OprOp types algebraic operation clauses op ℓop x k 7→ c. Looking up label ℓop
in Σ yields signature Aop _ Bop, where Aop describes the type of parameter x, and Bop the
type of the argument of continuation k. In order for an operation op to have type M A ! ⟨E ⟩,
c should have the same type.
Once again, the case for typing a scoped clause sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c (T-OprSc) is similar
to its algebraic equivalent, extended to include the scoped computation. Notice the type of p
and k when typing c. First, as λsc allows freedom in the scoped result type, the type variable
β is used for this type. Second, as shown in the operational semantics (rule E-HandSc), for
a clause sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, computation c uses the already-handled subcomputations p and k.
Therefore, type operator M occurs in the scoped result type as well as in the continuation’s
result type:
p : Bsc → M β ! ⟨E ⟩ k : β → M A ! ⟨E ⟩
This means that, even though our focus on mitigating the type mismatch between
scoped computation and continuation so far has been on forwarding unknown scoped effects,
the same applies when handling known scoped effects, where computation c accounts for
this discrepancy.
Forwarding Clause. In accordance with Section 3.3.2, when an application of a handler to
a scoped effect the handler does not contain a clause for is encountered, the effect must be
forwarded. Like the algebraic case, the effect is left in-place with handled sub-computations.
However, as described in Section 3.3.2, simply handling the sub-computations would result
in a type mismatch. It is clear from the typing rule that bind x k 7→ cf basically deals with
this type mismatch between the type M α of x and the parameter type α of k.
Handler. Rule T-Handler types handlers with a polymorphic type of the form ∀ α . α !
⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α ! ⟨E ⟩. A handler consists of a return-clause ( T-Return), zero or more
operation clauses ( T-Empty, T-OprOp and T-OprSc), and a forwarding clause ( T-Fwd).
All clauses should agree on their result type M α ! ⟨E ⟩. Notice that E denotes a collection
with at least the labels of the present algebraic and scoped operation clauses in the handler
(computed by the labels-function).
7. Generalized Forwarding
In Section 3.3.2 we showed how bind can be used to forward certain scoped effects. Here
we also noted that not all effects can be forwarded by bind, and that some require a more
general forwarding construct. In this section we revisit this issue. First, we show how
in some situations, we need a more expressive forwarding clause. We will then present a
generalized forwarding clause, and show how the bind-based forwarding clauses can be
straightforwardly desugared into generalized forwarding clauses. Finally, we will amend the
calculus with rules for its grammar, semantics and typing.

--- PDF page 19 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:19
7.1. Inc, revisited. We introduced hinc in an algebraic setting, and have not returned to it.
We have not yet given a forwarding clause for hinc (with carrier ( Int → (α, Int)! ⟨E ⟩)! ⟨E ⟩ for
some effect type E). We could implement the forwarding clause of it using bind as follows.
hinc✗ = handler {return x 7→ return (λs . return (x , s))
, op inc k 7→ return (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;do k ′ ← k s ′ ; k ′ s ′)
, bind x k 7→ return (λs . do (y, s ′) ← x s ; k ′ ← k y ; k ′ s ′)}
However, this implementation of forwarding would actually result in unexpected behaviours.
Consider the derivation displayed in Figure 7. The chosen example has an occurrence of
choose inside an occurrence of inc, both of them inside an occurrence of once. Since choose
is in the scope of once, we would expect that the choose is pruned by the once to only keep
the first branch. However, the derivation shows that by using the bind-based forwarding
clause of hinc✗ the choose escapes the scope of once. As can be seen, when head (i.e. the
embodiment of the once effect) is evaluated, choose has not even been handled yet; it is
captured by a function in the result list.
For the brevity of presentation, we omitted the unimportant part of terms in the
derivation, and we inline the guard that checks for the empty list in the if statement. We
underlined parts that will reduce in the next step(s).
The essence of this problem comes from the fact that the carrier of hinc contain compu-
tations. As a result, other operations in scope might be captured in these computations and
then be carried out of the scope. The bind-based forwarding of hinc is not expressive enough
to avoid this kind of unexpected behaviour, because it has no control over what is returned
by the scoped computation of scoped operations. For the example above, to correctly put
choose in the scope, we need to evaluate the result function of the scoped computation of
once that is handled by hinc, instead of directly returning this function which unexpectedly
captures choose. We will show how to solve this problem using a generalized version of
forwarding clauses in the remaining of this section.
In general, this problem shows up for any handler whose carrier suspends computations,
such as the carrier ofhinc which is a function. The effects captured in the suspend computation
can escape their scope without being handled. The generalized forwarding clause fixes this
problem by providing us the flexibility to early execute the suspend computation before
leaving the scope.
7.2. Adding generalized forwarding clauses. Whereas in the case of bind-like forward-
ing clauses the remittal of the unknown, to-be-forwarded scoped effect is dealt with by the
semantics (i.e., the reinvocation of scoped effect is embedded in the rule E-Bind), in the
case of generalized forwarding clauses, denoted by fwd, this responsibility is deferred to
the forwarding clause. This allows generalized forwarding clauses to execute logic before
remitting the forwarded effect, and to alter not only the continuation but also the scoped
computation of the forwarded effect. An intuitive implementation of fwd may look like this:
(sc ℓsc ) /∈ h (fwd′ ℓsc′ x p k 7→ cf ) ∈ h
with h handle sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ⇝
cf [ℓsc / ℓsc′, v / x ,
(λy . with h handle c1) / p,
(λz . with h handle c2) / k ]
E-FwdSc’
The forwarding clause has form fwd′ ℓsc′ x p k 7→ cf , where x , p, k represents for the param-
eter, (deeply handled) scoped computation, and (deeply handled) continuation, respectively.

--- PDF page 20 ---
17:20 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
with honce handle
do f ← with hinc✗ handle
sc once () ( . op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b))) (z . return z) ;
f 0
⇝∗ with honce handle
do f ←
sc once () ( . with hinc✗ handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b))))
(z . . . .)
f 0
⇝ with honce handle
sc once () ( . with hinc✗ handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b)))))
(z . . . . )
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle
with hinc✗ handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b)))
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle
return (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;
do k ′ ← with hinc✗ handle op choose () (b . return b) ;
k ′ s ′)
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← return [λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;
do k ′ ← with hinc✗ handle op choose () (b . return b) ;
k ′ s ′] ;
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do t ← head [λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;
do k ′ ← with hinc✗ handle op choose () (b . return b) ;
k ′ s ′] ;
. . .
⇝∗ [(true, 1), (false, 1)]
Figure 7: once escaping its scope when forwarded by bind
While this would give us our desired expressivity, it requires us to extend the calculus with
the ability to abstract and substitute operation labels.
To avoid unnecessary complication, we opt for another design choice. Because of
parametricity, there is only one thing a forwarding clause can do with an unknown label:
invoke it with some (possibly altered) scoped computation and continuation. Below we
utilize this property by, instead of supplying the forwarding clause with the label, we supply
it with what is essentially a partial application of the sc operator to the unknown label.
This partial application can be used by the forwarding clause in exactly the same way as
the original label was. Therefore, this simplifies the type system, but does not affect the
expressivity of forwarding clauses.

--- PDF page 21 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:21
(sc ℓsc ) /∈ h (fwd f p k 7→ cf ) ∈ h
with h handle
sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) ⇝
cf [(λy . with h handle c1) / p,
(λz . with h handle c2) / k ,
(λ(p′, k ′) . sc ℓsc v (y . p′ y) (z . k ′ z)) / f ]
E-FwdSc
7.3. Syntax & typing. We replace the bind syntax in handlers with fwd, and implement
bind as syntactic sugar for fwd.
handlers h ::= handler {. . .
, fwd f p k 7→ cf } generalized forwarding clause
bind x k 7→ c ≡ fwd f p k 7→ f (p, (λx . c))
Furthermore, we add a typing rule for typing fwd clauses, and a new rule for typing handlers
containing fwd clauses.
Ap = α → M β ! ⟨E ⟩
A′
p = α → γ ! ⟨E ⟩ Ak = β → M A ! ⟨E ⟩ A′
k = γ → δ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ, α, β, p : Ap, k : Ak , f : ∀ γ δ . (A′
p, A′
k) → δ! ⟨E ⟩ ⊢ cf : M A ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ fwd f p k 7→ cf : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Fwd
T-Handler
⟨F ⟩ ≡ ⟨⟩ ⟨labels (oprs) ;E ⟩ Γ, α ⊢ return x 7→ cr : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ, α ⊢ oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩ Γ, α ⊢ fwd f p k 7→ cf : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢ handler {return x 7→ cr , oprs, fwd f p k 7→ cf } : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩
Rule E-Bind and T-HandlerBind can be derived (and are therefore superseded by) E-Fwd
and T-Handler.
7.4. hinc, revisited again. Using generalized forwarding clauses, we can implement the
forwarding of hinc correctly as follows.
hinc = handler {. . . ,fwd f p k 7→ return (λs . f (λy . do p′ ← p y ; p′ s,
λ(z , s ′) . do k ′ ← k z ; k ′ s ′))}
Instead of directly returning the function p′ like the bind-based forwarding clause, the
fwd-based forwarding clause applies the initial state s to p′ to avoid the escaping of the
choose operation captured in p′. Then, to connect the results inside the scope with outside,
we apply the continuation k to the result z and the updated state s ′. The derivation is
shown in Figure 8. We only get the first result of the choose operation.

--- PDF page 22 ---
17:22 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
with honce handle
do f ← with hinc handle
sc once () ( . op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b))) (z . return z) ;
f 0
⇝∗ with honce handle
do f ← return (λs . sc once ()
( . do p′ ← (with hinc handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b)))) ;
p′ s)
(z . . . .))
f 0
⇝∗ with honce handle sc once ()
( . do p′ ← (with hinc handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b)))) ;
p′ 0)
(z . . . .)
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle (
do p′ ← (with hinc handle (op inc () ( . op choose () (b . return b)))) ;
p′ 0)
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle (
do p′ ← return (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;
do k ′ ← with hinc handle op choose () (b . return b) ;
k ′ s ′)
p′ 0)
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle (
do s ′ ← 0 + 1;
do k ′ ← with hinc handle op choose () (b . return b) ;
k ′ s ′)
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle (
op choose () (b . do k ′ ← return (λs . (b, s)) ;k ′ 1)) ;
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← with honce handle (
op choose () (b . return (b, 1))) ;
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ do ts ← return [(true, 1), (false, 1)] ;
if (ts = [ ]) then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; . . .
⇝∗ [(true, 1)]
Figure 8: once staying in its scope forwarded by fwd

--- PDF page 23 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:23
8. Metatheory
8.1. Syntax-directed version of λsc. Appendix D contains a syntax-directed version of
λsc. We prove the type safety of λsc by connecting the typing judgement of the declarative
version of λsc to those of the syntax-directed version of λsc in Appendix E. The type inference
algorithm implemented in our interpreter is also built on this syntax-directed version. The
syntax-directed version was obtained by the following three transformations.
First we removed rule T-EqV, which re-types expressions to some equivalent type. This
rule is used to make types line up exactly at the site of applications, for example by changing
the order of the labels in effect rows. As a consequence, in the syntax directed version we
essentially inline T-EqV wherever it is needed.
Secondly, we removed the rules dealing with generalisation and instantiation ( T-Inst,
T-InstEff, T-Gen and T-GenEff). Instead, whenever rules insist on some kind of
polymorphism on some subderivation, we extend the environment with fresh type variables,
and generalize over them locally, instead of via axillary rules.
Finally, as dealing with higher-kinded polymorphism is orthogonal to our work (and
real programming languages like Haskell and OCaml already have their solutions for higher-
kinded polymorphism [ YW14]), we avoid higher-order unification by annotating handlers
with the type operator they apply (e.g. handlerM {. . .} instead of handler {. . .}).
8.2. Safety. The type-and-effect system of λsc is type safe, which we show by proving
Subject Reduction and Progress. Here we briefly state the theorems; the proofs and used
lemmas can be found in Appendix E.
As values are inert, these theorems range over computations only. The formulation
of Subject Reduction (Theorem 8.1) is standard. Furthermore, apart from an additional
normal form sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2), Progress (Theorem 8.2) is standard as well. Note that
Progess implies effect safety, which intuitively means that only operations tracked in the
effect type can be invoked.
Theorem 8.1 (Subject Reduction). If Γ ⊢ c : C and c ⇝ c′, then there exists a C′ such
that C ≡ C′ and Γ ⊢ c′ : C′.
Theorem 8.2 (Progress). If · ⊢ c : A! ⟨E ⟩, then either:
• there exists a computation c ′ such that c ⇝ c′, or
• c is in a normal form, which means it is in one of the following forms: (1) c = return v,
(2) c = op ℓop v (y . c′) where ℓop ∈ E , or (3) c = sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) where ℓsc ∈ E .
9. Examples & Implementation
Now that we have formalized the calculus we can cover some examples. This serves two
purposes. First, we will highlight how the conventional encoding of scoped effects as handlers,
the solution proposed in Plotkin and Power [ PP03], is not expressive enough, even though
it is applied in the real world [ TRWS22]. We have postponed doing so, because now that
we have formally introduced a calculus, we can immediately show how λsc addresses these
issues. The first two examples in this section (exceptions with catch and reader with local)
therefore contain both an attempt at encoding them as an handler, as well as a proper
encoding as a sc in λsc. Secondly, the examples exemplify the expressivity of λsc.

--- PDF page 24 ---
17:24 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Syntactic sugar. To enhance readability, we write the examples in a higher-level syntax
following Eff’s conventions: we use top-level definitions, coalesce values and computations,
implicitly sequence steps and insert return where needed. Furthermore, we drop trivial
return continuations of operations:
op ℓop x ≡ op ℓop x (y . return y)
sc ℓsc x (y . c1) ≡ sc ℓsc x (y . c1) (z . return z)
Implementation. A prototype implementation of an interpreter for λsc is available at
https://github.com/thwfhk/lambdaSC. This implementation contains a Hindley-Milner
[Mil78] type inference algorithm for λsc, which is mostly an extension of the type inference
of Koka [Lei14]. There are two main things that we need to additionally deal with for scoped
effects. One is that we explicit force all handlers to be polymorphic. Note that there is no
requirement for undecidable polymorphic recursion; deep handlers are implicitly recursive
and always given polymorphic types. The other is that we require handlers to be annotated
with the type operators that they use for their carriers in order to avoid higher-order
unification. With explicit annotations for type operators, our unification algorithm just
needs to reduce types first before unifying. The details can be found in the code.
Each of the examples covered in the rest of this section have been implemented. See the
readme of the implementation’s repository for more information.
9.1. Exceptions. Wu et al. [ WSH14] have shown how to catch exceptions with a scoped
operation. Raising an exception is an algebraic operation raise : String _ Empty, and
catching an exception is a scoped operation catch : String _ Bool. For example, consider
that we are dealing with a counter with a maximum value of 10. The following computation
increases the counter by 1 and raises an exception when the counter exceeds 10:
incr = do x ← op inc () ;
if x > 10 then op raise "Overflow" (y . absurd y) else return x
Clearly, if we start with a state of 8 and call inc thrice, we end up with an exception.
We want to define a catch operation that executes an alternative computation when an
exception is thrown inside its scope.
9.1.1. Catch as handler. One might attempt to write catch as a handler. However, as we
will see, this method does not have the same modularity and expressivity as our calculus
because it cannot achieve the local update semantics [WSH14].
hexcept✗ = handler {return x 7→ right x , op raise e 7→ left e }
catch✗ c1 c2 ≡ with handler {return x 7→ return x
, op raise 7→ c2 } handle c1
ccatch✗ = do incr ; catch✗ (do incr ; do incr ; return "success")
(return "fail")
The catch✗ implements the catch operation as a handler. The hexcept✗ interprets exceptions
using a sum type. It is used to handle potential exceptions not captured by catch✗. By
handling exceptions before state we obtain global update semantics where the state updates
are not discarded when an error is raised:

--- PDF page 25 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:25
runinc 8 (with hexcept✗ handle ccatch✗) ⇝∗ (right "fail", 11)
When handling exceptions after state, we would expect local update semantics, where we
discard the state updates when an error is raised. Thus, the expected result should be
right ("fail", 9). However, we again get the global update semantics:
with hexcept✗ handle (runinc 8 ccatch✗) ⇝∗ (right "fail", 11)
How can this be? By implementing catch✗ as a handler, we have lost the separation between
syntax and semantics: catch✗ is supposed to denote syntax, but it contains semantics in the
form of a handler. Since we apply catch✗ to a computation ( ccatch✗), any containing raise
will have already been handled by catch✗ before hinc is applied. In other words, we have
lost modular composition because the handler of raise always come before the handler of
inc. As a result, we cannot change the semantics of the interactions of effects by swaping
the order of their handlers, which is certainly harmful to expressivity.
9.1.2. Catch as scoped effect. Let us implement catch as a scoped operation in λsc.
ccatch = do incr ; sc catch "Overflow" (b .
if b then (do incr ; do incr ; return "success")
else return "fail")
The scoped computation’s true branch is the program that may raise exceptions, while the
false branch deals with the exception. Our handler interprets exceptions in terms of a sum
type data α + β = left α | right β, where left v denotes an exception and right v a result.
hexcept : ∀ α µ . α ! ⟨raise ; catch ; µ⟩ ⇒ String + α! ⟨µ⟩
hexcept = handler
{return x 7→ right x
, op raise e 7→ left e
, sc catch e p k 7→ do x ← p true ;
case x of left e ′ | e ′ = e → exceptMap (p false) k
→ exceptMap x k
, bind x k 7→ exceptMap x k }
The return clause and algebraic operation clause for raise construct a return value and
raise an exception e by calling the right and left constructors, respectively. The scoped
operation clause for catch catches an exception e. If the scoped computation in p true raises
an exception e, it is caught by catch and replaced by the scoped computation ( p false).
Otherwise, it continues with p true and its results are passed to the continuation k. The
forwarding clause follows the same principle as that of how we write the forwarding clause
for hinc in Section 3.3.2. We just need to think about how to continue with k when we have
the result x that potentially fails. The most intuitive way is to return the exception if x
fails (left e), and we run the continuation k with the result if x succeeds (right y).
exceptMap : ∀ α β µ . String + β →µ (β →µ String + α) →µ String + α
exceptMap x k = case x of left e → left e
right y → k y
Given an initial counter value 8, we can handle the program ccatch with hexcept and hinc.
Different orders of the application of handlers give us different semantics of the interaction
of effects [WSH14]. Handling exceptions before increments gives us global updates:

--- PDF page 26 ---
17:26 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
runinc 8 (with hexcept handle ccatch) ⇝∗ (right "fail", 11)
Although an exception is raised and caught, the final value is still updated to 11 by the two
inc operations and exceeds the maximum value of our counter. When handling exceptions
after increments, we obtain the expected local update semantics:
with hexcept handle (runinc 8 ccatch) ⇝∗ right ("fail", 9)
The state updates introduced by the two invocations of inc inside the scope of catch are
discarded. This correctly reflects our intuition when the handler of inc comes before the
handler of raise.
9.2. Reader with Local. Reader entails an ask operation that lets one read the (integer)
state that is passed around. The scoped effect local takes a function f which alters the state,
and a computation for which the state should be altered, after which the state should be
returned to its original state. 3 For example, in sc local (λi . i ∗ 2) (op ask ()) (op ask ()),
the first ask receives a state that is doubled, whereas the second ask receives the original
state. To exemplify the problems that arise when implementing local as a handler, our
example uses effect foo, which is simply mapped to ask by hfoo:
hfoo = handler {return x 7→ return x
, op foo k 7→ do x ← op ask () (y . k y )
, bind x k 7→ k x }
9.2.1. Local as a handler. Whereas the lack of effect interaction control in example of catch
as a handler could be described as unfortunate, in the case for ask there is arguably only
one correct interaction, which is not the one that arises from scoped effects as handlers.
Consider clocal below, which includes foo, which is mapped to ask by hfoo.
local✗ f c ≡ with handler {return x 7→ return x
, op ask 7→ x ← ask ; f x } handle c
hread✗ = handler {return x 7→ λs . x , op ask k 7→ λs . k s s }
runread✗ s c ≡ do c′ ← with hread✗ handle c ; c′ s
clocal✗ = do x ← op ask () ;do y ← op foo ()
local✗ (λa → 2 ∗ a) (z ← op ask () ;u ← op foo () ;return (x , y, z , u))
Since hfoo introduces ask, we must (re)apply hread after applying hfoo. Since foo is mapped
to ask, in clocal✗ we expect x to be equal to y, and z equal to u. Starting with the reader
state set to 1, we expect the result (1 , 1, 2, 2). Instead, we get:
runread 1 (with hfoo handle clocal✗) ⇝∗ return (1, 1, 2, 1)
Again, how can this be? The cause is the same as the example with catch: since we encode
the semantics of local✗ in its definition, we are forced to perform the handling at the
moment of application. Notice that foo is not caught by local✗! Therefore, f is only
applied to ask. When foo is mapped to ask by hfoo, local✗’s effect will already have been
triggered, which is why f is not applied to it.
3The operation signature of local requires polymorphic parameter types like local:(∀ µ . Int →µ Int) _ (),
which we do not support. It is easy to extend operations in λsc with prenex polymorphic parameter types
without any need of other mechanism for higher-rank polymorphism.

--- PDF page 27 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:27
9.2.2. Local as a scoped effect. Using a scoped effect we can properly encode local:
hread : ∀ α µ . α ! ⟨ask ; local ; µ⟩ ⇒ (Int →µ α)! ⟨µ⟩
hread = handler {return x 7→ λs . x
, op ask k 7→ λs . k s s
, sc local f p k 7→ λs . do x ← p () (f s ) ;k x s
, fwd f p k 7→ λs . f (λy . p y s , λz . k z s )}
runread s c ≡ do c′ ← with hread handle c ; c′ s
clocal = do x ← op ask () ;do y ← op foo () ;
sc local (λa → 2 ∗ a)
(do z ← op ask () ;do u ← op foo () ;return (x , y, z , u))
Note that the forwarding clause of hread is similar to that of hinc in Section 7.4 except for
passing the same state to the scoped computation p and continuation k. This makes natural
sense because we definitely do not want the scopes of other irrelevant operations to change
what can be read. Since local is now purely syntactic, we can apply hfoo before hread, and
have hread handle the ask that hfoo outputs:
runread 1 (with hfoo handle clocal)
⇝ runread 1 (x ← op ask () ;y ← op ask () ;
sc local (λa → 2 ∗ a)
(do z ← op ask () ;do u ← op ask () ;return (x , y, z , u)))
⇝ return (1, 1, 2, 2)
9.3. Nondeterminism with Cut. The algebraic operation cut:() _ () provides a different
flavor of pruning nondeterminism that has its origin as a Prolog primitive. The idea is
that cut prunes all remaining branches and only allows the current branch to continue.
Typically, we want to keep the effect of cut local. This is achieved with the scoped operation
call : () _ (), as proposed by Wu et al. [ WSH14]. To handle cut and call, we use the
CutList datatype [PS17].
data CutList α = opened (List α) | closed (List α)
We can think of opened v as a list that may be extended and closed v as a list that may not
be extended with further elements. This intention is captured in the appendCutList function,
which discards the second list if the constructor of the first list is closed.
appendCutList : ∀ α µ . CutList α →µ CutList α →µ CutList α
appendCutList (opened xs) (opened ys) = opened (xs + +ys)
appendCutList (opened xs) (closed ys) = closed (xs + +ys)
appendCutList (closed xs) = closed xs
The handler for nondeterminism with cut is defined as follows:
hcut : ∀ α µ . α ! ⟨choose ; fail ; cut ; call ; µ⟩ ⇒ CutList α! ⟨µ⟩
hcut = handler {return x 7→ opened [x ]
, op fail 7→ opened [ ]
, op choose x k 7→ do xs ← k true ;
if isclose xs then xs else appendCutList xs (k false)
, op cut k 7→ close (k ())

--- PDF page 28 ---
17:28 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
, sc call p k 7→ concatMapCutList (open (p ())) k
, bind x k 7→ concatMapCutList x k }
The operation clause for cut closes the cutlist and the clause for call (re-)opens it when
coming out of the scope.
close : ∀ α µ . CutList α →µ CutList α
close (closed as) = closed as
close (opened as) = closed as
open : ∀ α µ . CutList α →µ CutList α
open (closed as) = opened as
open (opened as) = opened as
The function isclose checks whether a cutlist is closed. It is used in the choose clause
for efficiency; we do not need to execute k false when k true returns a closed list.
isclose : ∀ α µ . CutList α →µ CutList α
isclose (closed ) = true
isclose (opened ) = false
The forwarding of hcut uses the function concatMapCutList, the cutlist counterpart of
concatMap which takes the extensibility of CutList (signalled by opened and closed) into
account when concatenating.
concatMapCutList : ∀ α β µ . CutList β →µ (β →µ CutList α) →µ CutList α
concatMapCutList (opened [ ]) f = return (opened [ ])
concatMapCutList (closed [ ]) f = return (closed [ ])
concatMapCutList (opened (b : bs)) f = do as ← f b ;
as ′ ← concatMapCutList (opened bs) f ;
appendCutList as as ′
concatMapCutList (closed (b : bs)) f = do as ← f b ;
as ′ ← concatMapCutList (closed bs) f ;
appendCutList as as ′
In Section 9.5, we give an example usage of cut to improve parsers.
9.4. Depth-Bounded Search. The handler hND for nondeterminism shown in Section 2
implements the depth-first search (DFS) strategy. However, with scoped effects and handlers
we can implement other search strategies, such as depth-bounded search (DBS) [YPW+22],
which uses the scoped operation depth : Int _ () to bound the depth of the branches in
the scoped computation. The handler uses return type Int →µ List (α, Int). Here, the Int
parameter is the current depth bound, and the result is a list of ( α, Int) pairs, where α
denotes the result and Int reflects the remaining global depth bound. 4
hdepth : ∀ α µ . α ! ⟨choose ; fail ; depth ; µ⟩ ⇒ (Int →µ List (α, Int))! ⟨µ⟩
hdepth = handler
{return x 7→ λd . [(x , d)]
, op fail 7→ λ . [ ]
, op choose x k 7→ λd . if d = 0 then [ ] else k true (d − 1) + +k false (d − 1)
, sc depth d ′ p k 7→ λd . concatMap (p () d ′) (λ(v , ) . k v d )
, fwd f p k 7→ λd . f (λy . p y d , λvs . concatMap vs (λ(v , d) . k v d ))}
4The pair type ( α, Int) differs from Yang et al. [YPW +22]’s α in order to enable forwarding.

--- PDF page 29 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:29
sc depth 1 ( . op choose ())
return 1 op choose ()
return 2 return 3
depth 1
depth 2
(x . op choose ())
return x op choose ()
return 4 op choose ()
return 5 return 6
depth 1
depth 2
depth 3
Figure 9: Visual representation of cdepth.
For the depth operation, we locally use the given depth bound d ′ for the scoped computation
p and go back to using the global depth bound d for the continuation k. In case of an
unknown scoped operation, the forwarding clause just threads the depth bound through,
first into the scoped computation and from there into the continuation. It is similar to a
combination of the forwarding of honce and hinc.
For example, the following program (Figure 9) has a local depth bound of 1 and a global
depth bound of 2. It discards the results 2 and 3 in the scoped computation as they appear
after the second choose operation, and similarly, the results 5 and 6 in the continuation are
ignored.
cdepth = sc depth 1
( . do b1 ← op choose () ;if b1 then return 1 else
do b2 ← op choose () ;if b2 then return 2 else return 3)
(x . do b1 ← op choose () ;if b1 then return x else
do b2 ← op choose () ;if b2 then return 4 else
do b3 ← op choose () ;if b3 then return 5 else return 6)
>>> (with hdepth handle cdepth) 2
[(1, 1), (4, 0)]
The result is [(1 , 1), (4, 0)], where the tuple’s second parameter represents the global depth
bound. Notice that choose operations in the scoped computation depth do not consume
the global depth bound in the handler. We also show an alternative implementation of the
handler clause for depth in the Supplementary Material.
9.5. Parsers. A parser effect can be achieved by combining the nondeterminism-with-cut
effect and a token-consuming effect [ WSH14]. The latter features the algebraic operation
token : Char _ Char where op token t consumes a single character from the implicit input
string; if it is t, it is passed on to the continuation; otherwise the operation fails. The token
handler has result type String →⟨fail ;µ⟩ (α, String): it threads through the remaining part
of the input string. Observe that the function type signals it may fail, in case the token
does not match.
htoken : ∀ α µ . α ! ⟨token ; fail ; µ⟩ ⇒ (String →⟨fail ;µ⟩ (α, String))! ⟨fail ; µ⟩
htoken = handler
{return x 7→ λs . (x , s)
, op token x k 7→ λs . case s of [ ] → failure ()
(x ′ : xs) → if x = x ′ then k x xs else failure ()
, fwd f p k 7→ λs . f (λy . p y s , λ(t, s ′) . k t s ′)}

--- PDF page 30 ---
17:30 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
The forwarding clause of htoken is the same as that of hinc in Section 7.4. We uses
the initial state s for the scoped computation p, and the updated state s ′ for the contin-
uation k. The updated state s ′ is passed in from the scoped computation p and reflects
the consumption of tokens in p. An alternative forwarding semantics is fwd f p k 7→
λs . f (λy . p y s , λ(t, s ′) . k t s ), where the continuation k also uses the initial state s. In
this way, we actually discard all the changes to the state in the scoped computation, which
could potentially be useful to implement parser lookahead. It is up to the programmer to
decide which semantics they want.
We give an example parser for a small expression language, in the typical parser
combinator style, built on top of the token-consumer and nondeterminism. For convenience,
it uses the syntactic sugar x ⋄ y ≡ op choose (b . if b then x else y).
digit : ∀ µ .() → Char ! ⟨token ; choose ; µ⟩
digit = op token ’0’ ⋄ op token ’1’ ⋄ . . . ⋄ op token ’9’
many1 : ∀ α µ . (() →µ α) →µ List α
many1 p = do a ← p () ;do as ← many1 p ⋄ return [ ] ;return (a : as)
expr′ : ∀ µ .() → Int ! ⟨token ; choose ; µ⟩
expr′ = (do i ← term′ () ;do op token ’+’ ; do j ← expr′ () ;return (i + j ))
⋄ (do i ← term′ () ;return i)
term′ : ∀ µ .() → Int ! ⟨token ; choose ; µ⟩
term′ = (do i ← factor () ;do op token ’*’ ; do j ← term () ;return (i ∗ j ))
⋄ (do i ← factor () ;return i)
factor : ∀ µ .() → Int ! ⟨token ; choose ; µ⟩
factor = (do ds ← many1 digit ; return (read ds))
⋄ (do op token ’(’ ; do i ← expr′ () ;do op token ’)’ ; return i)
The expr′ and term′ parsers are naive and can be improved by two steps of refactoring: (1)
factoring out the common prefix in the two branches, and (2) pruning the second branch
when the first branch successfully consumes a + or ∗, respectively. The optimised versions
of expr, term, and factor are shown as follows using the cut operation defined in Section 9.3.
expr : ∀ µ .() → Int ! ⟨token ; choose ; cut ; µ⟩
expr = do i ← term () ;
sc call () ( . (do op token ’+’ ; do op cut () ;
do j ← expr () ;return (i + j )) ⋄ i)
term : ∀ µ .() → Int ! ⟨token ; choose ; cut ; µ⟩
term = do i ← factor () ;
sc call () ( . (do op token ’*’ ; do op cut () ;
do j ← term () ;return (i ∗ j )) ⋄ i)
Here is how we invoke the optimised parser on an example input.
>>> with hcut handle (with htoken handle expr ()) "(2+5)*8"
opened [(56, "")]
Note that only the fully parsed result is returned because in expr and term we prune other
branches when the first branch succeeds. If we parse the same input using the unoptimised
parser expr′, we also get partially parsed results.

--- PDF page 31 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:31
>>> with hcut handle (with htoken handle expr′ ()) "(2+5)*8"
opened [(56, ""), (7, "*8")]
10. Related Work
In this section, we discuss related work on algebraic effects, scoped effects, and effect systems.
10.1. Algebraic Effects & Handlers. Many research languages for algebraic effects
and handlers have been proposed, including Eff [ BP13, Pre15], Frank [ LMM17], Effekt
[BSO20], or have been extended to include them, such as Links [ HL16] and Koka [ Lei17].
OCaml [SDW+21] is the first industrial language supporting algebraic effects and handlers.
Although it is possible to use handlers or write algebraic operations with function parameters
to simulate the behaviours of scoped effects in these languages, none of them can achieve
the expressiveness of real scoped effects & handlers as we have compared in Section 9.1 and
Section 9.2.
There are also many packages for writing effect handlers in general purpose languages
like Haskell and OCaml [ KSSF19, KS18, RTWS18, Mag19, Kin19]. Yet, as far as we know,
λsc is the first calculus that supports scoped effects & handlers.
10.2. Effect Systems. Most languages with support for algebraic effects are equipped with
an effect system to keep track of the effects that are used in the programs. There is already
much work on different approaches to effect systems for algebraic effects.
Eff [BP13, Pre15] uses an effect system based on subtyping relations. Each type of
computation is decorated with an effect type ∆ to represent the set of operations that might
be invoked. The subtyping relations are used to extend the effect type ∆ with other effects,
which makes it possible to compose programs in a modular way. The implementation of
such a subtyping system is orthogonal to the implementation of scoped effects, which is why
we have opted for Koka-style row polymorphisms, which has yielded a simpler type system.
Furthermore, supporting both polymorphism and non-trivial subtyping would complicate
the type inference a lot as shown in [ Pre14] and [THLM24] which use type inference with
constraints and qualified types, respectively. Moreover, since λsc has type operators, we need
to additionally distinguish between the positive and negative positions in type operators
and propagate subtyping relations through these positions properly. This would further
complicate the formalisation of type system and type inference.
Row polymorphism is another mainstream approach to effect systems. Links [ HL16]
uses the R´ emy-style row polymorphism [R´ em94], where the row types are able to represent
the absence of labels and each label is restricted to appear at most once. Koka [ Lei17] uses
row polymorphism based on scoped labels [ Lei05], which allows duplicated labels and as a
result is easier to implement. We can use row polymorphism to write handlers that handle
particular effects and forward other effects represented by a row variable. In λsc, we opted
for an effect system similar to Koka’s, mainly because of its brevity. We believe that the
Links-style effect system should also work well with scoped effects.

--- PDF page 32 ---
17:32 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
10.3. Scoped Effects & Handlers. Wu et al. [ WSH14] first introduced the idea of scoped
effects & handlers to solve the problem of separating syntax from semantics in programming
with effects that delimit the scope. They proposed a syntax based on higher-order functors,
which impose fewer restrictions on the shape of the signatures of scoped operations than
λsc. Their work also considers the problem of modular composition of handlers, and
presents a solution–called “weaving”–based on threading a handler state through unknown
operations. This approach is rather ad-hoc; it is not a generalization of the forwarding
approach for algebraic effects. This approach has been adopted by several Haskell packages
[RTWS18, Mag19, Kin19].
Pir´ og et al. [PSWJ18] and Yang et al. [ YPW+22] have developed denotational semantic
domains of scoped effects, backed by category theoretical models. The key idea is to
generalize the denotational approach of algebraic effects & handlers that is based on free
monads and their unique homomorphisms. Indeed, the underlying category can be seen as a
parameter. Then, by shifting from the base category of types and functions to a different
(indexed or functor) category, scoped operations and their handlers turn out to be “just”
an instance of the generalized notion of algebraic operations and handlers with the same
structure and properties. We focus on a calculus for scoped effects instead of the denotational
semantics of scoped effects. We make a simplification with respect to Yang et al. [ YPW+22]
where we avoid duplication of the base algebra and endoalgebra (for the outer and inner
scoped respectively), and thus duplication of the scoped effect clauses in our handlers. With
respect to Pir´ og et al. [PSWJ18], we specialize the generic endofunctor Γ with signatures
Aℓ _ Bℓ of endofunctors of the form A × (B → −). Our λsc calculus uses a similar idea to
the ‘explicit substitution’ monad of Pir´ og et al. [PSWJ18], a generalization of Ghani and
Uustalu’s [GU03] monad of explicit substitutions where each operation is associated with
two computations representing the computation in scope and out of the scope (continuation)
respectively. Neither Pir´ og et al. [ PSWJ18] nor Yang et al. [ YPW+22] considered the
modular composition of scoped effects or the forwarding of operations in their categorical
models.
Yang and Wu [YW23] develop a framework for (generalized) monoids with operations,
of which scope effects are an instance. They study the problem of semantic modularity in
this framework, and have some generic results which can be applied to scoped effects. As
far as we know, no language design or library implementation of scoped effects has resulted
from this yet.
Lindley et al. [ LMM+23] developed an equational reasoning framework for scoped
effects based on parameterised algebraic theories [ Sta13]. They do not consider handlers or
forwarding.
11. Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we have presented λsc, a novel calculus in which scoped effects & handlers are
built-in. We started from the core calculus of Eff, extended it with a row-based effect system
in the style of Koka, and added primitive support for scoped operations and their handlers.
We introduced novel forwarding clauses as a means to obtain the modular composition of
handlers in the presence of scoped effects. Finally, we have demonstrated the usability of λsc
by implementing a range of examples. We believe that the features to support scoped effect
in λsc are orthogonal to other language features and can be added to any programming
language with algebraic effects, polymorphism and type operators.

--- PDF page 33 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:33
Scoped effects require every handler in λsc to be polymorphic and equipped with an
explicit forwarding clause. This breaks backwards compatibility: calculi that support only
algebraic effects, such as Eff, miss an explicit forwarding clause for scoped operations and
allow monomorphic handlers. This problem can be easily mitigated by kinds and kind
polymorphism. The core idea is that we extend λsc with two kinds op and sc for effect
types, such that Γ ⊢ E : op means effect type E only contains algebraic operations, and
Γ ⊢ E : sc means effect type E may contain some scoped operations. Then, for handlers
of type A!⟨E ⟩ ⇒ M A !⟨F ⟩ which lack forwarding clauses, we can just add the condition
Γ ⊢ E : op to their typing rules. We leave the full formalisation and implementation of it to
future work.
Making scoped effects and handlers into practical languages is a pretty new research
area full of potential. There is a lot of future work to do. Directions for future work include:
extending λsc with shallow handlers [ KLO13, HL18b], named handlers [ BPPS20, XCIL22,
BSO20], and other forms of higher-order effects [ BS24] including latent effects [ BSPW21]
and parallel effects [ XJMP21]; exploring the notion of named scoped effects where scoped
effects themselves generate fresh names for the operations in their scope in a similar style to
named handlers; defining a CPS translation for scoped effects and handlers [ HLA20, Lei17];
developing control-flow linearity [THLM24] for scoped effects to soundly extend λsc with
linear types; exploring guiding principles and equational theories for writing and reasoning
about forwarding clauses.
Acknowledgment
Part of this work was funded by FWO project G0A9423N.
References
[BP13] Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. An effect system for algebraic effects and handlers. In
Reiko Heckel and Stefan Milius, editors, Algebra and Coalgebra in Computer Science - 5th
International Conference, CALCO 2013, Warsaw, Poland, September 3-6, 2013. Proceedings ,
volume 8089 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 1–16. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/
978-3-642-40206-7\_1 .
[BP15] Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. Programming with algebraic effects and handlers. Journal
of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming , 84(1):108–123, 2015. Special Issue: The
23rd Nordic Workshop on Programming Theory (NWPT 2011) Special Issue: Domains X,
International workshop on Domain Theory and applications, Swansea, 5-7 September, 2011. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352220814000194, doi:10.1016/j.
jlamp.2014.02.001.
[BPPS20] Dariusz Biernacki, Maciej Pir´ og, Piotr Polesiuk, and Filip Sieczkowski. Binders by day, labels by
night: effect instances via lexically scoped handlers. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 4(POPL):48:1–
48:29, 2020. doi:10.1145/3371116.
[BS24] Birthe van den Berg and Tom Schrijvers. A framework for higher-order effects & handlers. Science
of Computer Programming, 234:103086, 2024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167642324000091, doi:10.1016/j.scico.2024.103086.
[BSO20] Jonathan Immanuel Brachth¨ auser, Philipp Schuster, and Klaus Ostermann. Effects as capabilities:
Effect handlers and lightweight effect polymorphism. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 4(OOPSLA),
November 2020. doi:10.1145/3428194.
[BSPW21] Birthe van den Berg, Tom Schrijvers, Casper Bach Poulsen, and Nicolas Wu. Latent effects
for reusable language components. In Hakjoo Oh, editor, Programming Languages and Systems
- 19th Asian Symposium, APLAS 2021, Chicago, IL, USA, October 17-18, 2021, Proceedings ,

--- PDF page 34 ---
17:34 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
volume 13008 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 182–201. Springer, 2021. doi:10.
1007/978-3-030-89051-3\_11 .
[GU03] Neil Ghani and Tarmo Uustalu. Explicit substitutions and higher-order syntax. In Proceedings of
the 2003 ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Mechanized Reasoning about Languages with Variable
Binding, MERLIN ’03, page 1–7, New York, NY, USA, 2003. Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/976571.976580.
[HL16] Daniel Hillerstr¨ om and Sam Lindley. Liberating effects with rows and handlers. InProceedings of
the 1st International Workshop on Type-Driven Development , TyDe 2016, page 15–27, New York,
NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/2976022.2976033.
[HL18a] Daniel Hillerstr¨ om and Sam Lindley. Shallow effect handlers. In Sukyoung Ryu, editor,Program-
ming Languages and Systems - 16th Asian Symposium, APLAS 2018, Wellington, New Zealand,
December 2-6, 2018, Proceedings, volume 11275 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
415–435. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-02768-1\_22 .
[HL18b] Daniel Hillerstr¨ om and Sam Lindley. Shallow effect handlers. In Sukyoung Ryu, editor,Program-
ming Languages and Systems - 16th Asian Symposium, APLAS 2018, Wellington, New Zealand,
December 2-6, 2018, Proceedings, volume 11275 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
415–435. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-02768-1\_22 .
[HLA20] Daniel Hillerstr¨ om, Sam Lindley, and Robert Atkey. Effect handlers via generalised continuations.
J. Funct. Program., 30:e5, 2020. doi:10.1017/S0956796820000040.
[Kin19] Alexis King. eff – screaming fast extensible effects for less, 2019. https://github.com/hasura/
eff.
[KLO13] Ohad Kammar, Sam Lindley, and Nicolas Oury. Handlers in action. In Greg Morrisett and
Tarmo Uustalu, editors, ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming,
ICFP’13, Boston, MA, USA - September 25 - 27, 2013 , pages 145–158. ACM, 2013. doi:
10.1145/2500365.2500590.
[KS18] Oleg Kiselyov and KC Sivaramakrishnan. Eff directly in OCaml. Electronic Proceedings in
Theoretical Computer Science, 285:23–58, Dec 2018. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.
285.2, doi:10.4204/eptcs.285.2.
[KSSF19] Oleg Kiselyov, Amr Sabry, Cameron Swords, and Ben Foppa. extensible-effects: An alternative
to monad transformers, 2019. https://hackage.haskell.org/package/extensible-effects.
[Lei05] Daan Leijen. Extensible records with scoped labels. In Marko C. J. D. van Eekelen, editor, Revised
Selected Papers from the Sixth Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming, TFP 2005,
Tallinn, Estonia, 23-24 September 2005 , volume 6 of Trends in Functional Programming, pages
179–194. Intellect, 2005.
[Lei14] Daan Leijen. Koka: Programming with row polymorphic effect types. Electronic Proceedings in
Theoretical Computer Science, 153, 06 2014. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.153.8.
[Lei17] Daan Leijen. Type directed compilation of row-typed algebraic effects. In Proceedings of the
44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages , POPL 2017, page
486–499, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/
3009837.3009872.
[LMM17] Sam Lindley, Conor McBride, and Craig McLaughlin. Do be do be do. In Proceedings of the
44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages , POPL 2017, page
500–514, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/
3009837.3009897.
[LMM+23] Sam Lindley, Cristina Matache, Sean Moss, Sam Staton, Nicolas Wu, and Zhixuan Yang. Scoped
effects as parameterized algebraic theories. In European Symposium on Programming 2024 ,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, December 2023. URL: https://etaps.org/2024/
conferences/esop/.
[LPT03] Paul Blain Levy, John Power, and Hayo Thielecke. Modelling environments in call-by-value
programming languages. Inf. Comput. , 185(2):182–210, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0890-5401(03)
00088-9.
[Mag19] Sandy Maguire. polysemy: Higher-order, low-boilerplate free monads, 2019. https://hackage.
haskell.org/package/polysemy.
[Mil78] Robin Milner. A theory of type polymorphism in programming. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 17(3):348–
375, 1978. doi:10.1016/0022-0000(78)90014-4.

--- PDF page 35 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:35
[Mog89] Eugenio Moggi. An abstract view of programming languages. Technical Report ECS-LFCS-90-113,
Edinburgh University, Department of Computer Science, June 1989.
[Mog91] Eugenio Moggi. Notions of computation and monads. Information and Computation , 93(1):55 –
92, 1991. Selections from 1989 IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science. doi:10.1016/
0890-5401(91)90052-4.
[PP03] Gordon D. Plotkin and John Power. Algebraic operations and generic effects. Appl. Categorical
Struct., 11(1):69–94, 2003. doi:10.1023/A:1023064908962.
[PP09] Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. Handlers of algebraic effects. In Giuseppe Castagna, editor,
Programming Languages and Systems , pages 80–94, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-00590-9\_7 .
[Pre14] Matija Pretnar. Inferring algebraic effects. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 10(3), 2014. doi:10.2168/
LMCS-10(3:21)2014.
[Pre15] Matija Pretnar. An introduction to algebraic effects and handlers. invited tutorial paper.Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 319:19–35, 2015. The 31st Conference on the Mathematical
Foundations of Programming Semantics (MFPS XXXI). URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1571066115000705, doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2015.12.003.
[PS17] Maciej Pir´ og and Sam Staton. Backtracking with cut via a distributive law and left-zero monoids.
J. Funct. Program., 27:e17, 2017. doi:10.1017/S0956796817000077.
[PSWJ18] Maciej Pir´ og, Tom Schrijvers, Nicolas Wu, and Mauro Jaskelioff. Syntax and semantics for
operations with scopes. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in
Computer Science, LICS ’18, page 809–818, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing
Machinery. doi:10.1145/3209108.3209166.
[R´ em94] Didier R´ emy. Type inference for records in a natural extension of ml. InTheoretical Aspects of
Object-Oriented Programming: Types, Semantics, and Language Design . Citeseer, 1994.
[RTWS18] Rob Rix, Patrick Thomson, Nicolas Wu, and Tom Schrijvers. fused-effects: A fast, flexible, fused
effect system, 2018. https://hackage.haskell.org/package/fused-effects.
[SDW+21] KC Sivaramakrishnan, Stephen Dolan, Leo White, Tom Kelly, Sadiq Jaffer, and Anil Mad-
havapeddy. Retrofitting effect handlers onto OCaml. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIG-
PLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI
2021, page 206–221, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/3453483.3454039.
[SPWJ19] Tom Schrijvers, Maciej Pir´ og, Nicolas Wu, and Mauro Jaskelioff. Monad transformers and modular
algebraic effects: what binds them together. In Richard A. Eisenberg, editor, Proceedings of
the 12th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Haskell, Haskell@ICFP 2019, Berlin,
Germany, August 18-23, 2019 , pages 98–113. ACM, 2019. doi:10.1145/3331545.3342595.
[Sta13] Sam Staton. Instances of computational effects: An algebraic perspective. In 28th Annual
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2013, New Orleans, LA, USA,
June 25-28, 2013 , page 519. IEEE Computer Society, 2013. doi:10.1109/LICS.2013.58.
[THLM24] Wenhao Tang, Daniel Hillerstr¨ om, Sam Lindley, and J. Garrett Morris. Soundly handling linearity.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 8(POPL):1600–1628, 2024. doi:10.1145/3632896.
[TRWS22] Patrick Thomson, Rob Rix, Nicolas Wu, and Tom Schrijvers. Fusing industry and academia at
GitHub (experience report). Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 6(ICFP):496–511, 2022. doi:10.1145/
3547639.
[Wad95] Philip Wadler. Monads for functional programming. In Johan Jeuring and Erik Meijer, editors,
Advanced Functional Programming, First International Spring School on Advanced Functional
Programming Techniques, B ˚ astad, Sweden, May 24-30, 1995, Tutorial Text, volume 925 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 24–52. Springer, 1995. doi:10.1007/3-540-59451-5\_2 .
[WSH14] Nicolas Wu, Tom Schrijvers, and Ralf Hinze. Effect handlers in scope. In Proceedings of the 2014
ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Haskell , Haskell ’14, page 1–12, New York, NY, USA, 2014.
Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/2633357.2633358.
[XCIL22] Ningning Xie, Youyou Cong, Kazuki Ikemori, and Daan Leijen. First-class names for effect
handlers. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 6(OOPSLA2):30–59, 2022. doi:10.1145/3563289.
[XJMP21] Ningning Xie, Daniel D. Johnson, Dougal Maclaurin, and Adam Paszke. Parallel algebraic
effect handlers. CoRR, abs/2110.07493, 2021. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07493, arXiv:
2110.07493.

--- PDF page 36 ---
17:36 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
[YPW+22] Zhixuan Yang, Marco Paviotti, Nicolas Wu, Birthe van den Berg, and Tom Schrijvers. Struc-
tured handling of scoped effects. In Ilya Sergey, editor, Programming Languages and Systems -
31st European Symposium on Programming, ESOP 2022, Held as Part of the European Joint
Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2022, Munich, Germany, April 2-7,
2022, Proceedings, volume 13240 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 462–491. Springer,
2022. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-99336-8\_17 .
[YW14] Jeremy Yallop and Leo White. Lightweight higher-kinded polymorphism. In Michael Codish and
Eijiro Sumii, editors, Functional and Logic Programming, pages 119–135, Cham, 2014. Springer
International Publishing.
[YW23] Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu. Modular models of monoids with operations. Proc. ACM Program.
Lang., 7(ICFP):566–603, 2023. doi:10.1145/3607850.

--- PDF page 37 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:37
Appendix Contents
• Appendix A: Semantic Derivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
• Appendix B: Type Equivalence Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
• Appendix C: Well-scopedness Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
• Appendix D: Syntax-directed version of λsc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
• Appendix E: Metatheory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Appendix A. Semantic Derivations
This Appendix contains semantic derivations of different handler applications that are used
in the examples throughout this paper.
A.1. Nondeterminism.
with hND handle cND1
≡ with hND handle op choose () (b . if b then return 1 else return 2)
⇝ {- E-HandOp -}
do xs ← (λy . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) true
do ys ← (λy . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) false
xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-AppAbs -}
do xs ← with hND handle if true then return 1 else return 2
do ys ← (λy . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) false
xs + +ys
⇝ {- reducing if -}
do xs ← with hND handle return 1
do ys ← (λy . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) false
xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-HandRet -}
do ys ← (λy . with hND handle if b then return 1 else return 2) false
[1] + +ys
⇝ {- similar to above (the first branch of if) -}
[1] + +[2]
⇝ {- reducing + + -}
return [1, 2]
A.2. Increment.
with hND handle runinc 0 cinc ≡ with hND handle (λc p . do p′ ←
with hinc handle p ; p′ c) 0 cinc
⇝ {- E-AppAbs -}
with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle cinc ; p′ 0
≡ { - definition of cinc -}
with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle op choose () (b . if b then
op inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2)) ;p′ 0

--- PDF page 38 ---
17:38 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
⇝ {- E-FwdOp -}
with hND handle do p′ ← op choose () (b . with hinc handle if b then
op inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2)) ;p′ 0
⇝ {- E-Hand and E-DoOp -}
with hND handle op choose () (b . do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then
op inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0)
⇝ {- E-HandOp -}
do xs ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) true ;
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-AppAbs -}
do xs ← with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if true then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- reducing if -}
do xs ← with hND handle (do p′ ← with hinc handle op inc ()
(x . x + 5) ;p′ 0)
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-HandOp -}
do xs ← with hND handle (do p′ ← return (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;do k ′ ←
(λx . with hinc handle (x + 5)) s ′ ; k ′ s ′) ;p′ 0)
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-DoRet -}
do xs ← with hND handle (λs . do s ′ ← s + 1 ;k ′ ← (λx . with hinc
handle (x + 5))s ′ ; k ′ s ′) 0
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝∗ {- E-AppAbs and reducing + - }
do xs ← with hND handle (with hinc handle (return 6)) 1
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-HandRet -}
do xs ← (λs . return (6, s)) 1
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-AppAbs -}
do xs ← with hND handle return (6, 1)
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-HandOp -}

--- PDF page 39 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:39
do xs ← return [(6, 1)]
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← with hinc handle if b then op
inc () (x . x + 5) else op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ; xs + +ys
⇝ {- E-DoRet -}
do ys ← (λb . with hND handle do p′ ← if b then with hinc handle op
inc () (x . x + 5) else with hinc handle op inc () (y . y + 2) ;p′ 0) false ;
[(6, 1)] + +ys
⇝∗ {- similar to above (the first branch of if) -}
do ys ← return [(3, 1)] [(6 , 1)] + +ys
⇝∗ {- E-DoRet -}
[(6, 1)] + +[(3, 1)]
⇝∗ {- reducing + + -}
return [(6, 1), (3, 1)]
A.3. Once.
with honce handle conce
⇝ {- E-HandSc -}
do ts ← (λy . with honce handle op choose () (x . return x)) () ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝ {- E-Do and E-AppAbs -}
do ts ← with honce handle op choose () (x . return x) ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝ {- E-Do and E-HandOp -}
do ts ← do xs ← (λx . with honce handle return x) true ;
do ys ← (λx . with honce handle return x) false ; xs + +ys ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝ {- E-Do and E-AppAbs -}
do ts ← do xs ← with honce handle return true ;
do ys ← with honce handle return false ; xs + +ys ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝ {- E-Do and E-HandRet -}
do ts ← do xs ← return [true] ;do ys ← return [false] ;xs + +ys ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝∗ {- E-DoRet -}
do ts ← [true, false] ;
do b ← ts = [ ] ;if b then return [ ] else do t ← head ts ; (λp . with
honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q))) t
⇝∗ {- E-DoRet -}

--- PDF page 40 ---
17:40 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
(λp . with honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (p, q)))
true
⇝ {- E-AppAbs -}
with honce handle (do q ← op choose (b . return b) ;return (true, q))
⇝∗ {- similar to A.1 (handling of choose) -}
return [(true, true), (true, false)]

--- PDF page 41 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:41
Appendix B. Type Equivalence Rules
This appendix shows the type equivalence rules of λsc. Figures 10 and 11 contains the rules.
Rules Q-AppAbs and Q-Swap deserve special attention. The other rules are straightforward.
σ1 ≡ σ2 Type equivalence
σ ≡ σ Q-Refl
σ1 ≡ σ2
σ2 ≡ σ1
Q-Symm
σ1 ≡ σ2 σ2 ≡ σ3
σ1 ≡ σ3
Q-Trans
A1 ≡ A2 B1 ≡ B2
(A1, B1) ≡ (A2, B2) Q-Pair
A ≡ B C ≡ D
A → C ≡ B → D Q-Fun
C1 ≡ D1 C2 ≡ D2
C1 ⇒ C2 ≡ D1 ⇒ D2
Q-Hand
σ1 ≡ σ2
∀ α . σ1 ≡ ∀ α . σ2
Q-AllTy
σ1 ≡ σ2
∀ µ . σ1 ≡ ∀ µ . σ2
Q-AllRow
A ≡ B
λ α . A ≡ λ α . B Q-Abs
M1 ≡ M2 A ≡ B
M1 A ≡ M2 B Q-App (λ α . A) B ≡ A [B / α] Q-AppAbs
A ≡ B E ≡⟨⟩ F
A ! ⟨E ⟩ ≡ B ! ⟨F ⟩ Q-Comp
Figure 10: Type equivalence of λsc.
E ≡⟨⟩ F Row equivalence
E ≡⟨⟩ E R-Refl
E ≡⟨⟩ F
F ≡⟨⟩ E R-Symm
E1 ≡⟨⟩ E2 E2 ≡⟨⟩ E3
E1 ≡⟨⟩ E3
R-Trans
E ≡⟨⟩ F
ℓ ; E ≡⟨⟩ ℓ ; F R-Head
ℓ1 ̸= ℓ2
ℓ1 ; ℓ2 ; E ≡⟨⟩ ℓ2 ; ℓ1 ; E R-Swap
Figure 11: Row equivalence of λsc.

--- PDF page 42 ---
17:42 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Appendix C. Well-scopedness Rules
This appendix shows the well-scopedness rules of λsc. Figure 12 contains the rules.
Γ ⊢ σ Γ ⊢ M Γ ⊢ E Γ ⊢ C Type well-scopedness
Γ ⊢ () W-Unit
Γ ⊢ A Γ ⊢ B
Γ ⊢ (A, B) W-Pair
α ∈ Γ
Γ ⊢ α W-V ar
Γ, α ⊢ A
Γ ⊢ ∀ α . A W-All
Γ ⊢ A Γ ⊢ E
Γ ⊢ A ! ⟨E ⟩ W-Comp
Γ, α ⊢ A
Γ ⊢ λ α . A W-Abs
Γ ⊢ M Γ ⊢ A
Γ ⊢ M A W-App
Γ ⊢ A Γ ⊢ C
Γ ⊢ A → C W-Fun
Γ ⊢ C Γ ⊢ D
Γ ⊢ C ⇒ D W-Hand
µ ∈ Γ
Γ ⊢ µ W-RowV ar Γ ⊢ · W-EmptyRow
Γ ⊢ E
Γ ⊢ ℓ ; E W-Extension
Figure 12: Well-scopedness rules of λsc.

--- PDF page 43 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:43
Appendix D. Syntax-directed version of λsc
This section describes the syntax-direction version of λsc.
The syntax-directed rules can be found in Figure 13 for value typing, Figure 14 for
computation and Figure 15 for handler typing.
Γ ⊢SD v : A Value Typing
(x : σ) ∈ Γ σ ⩽ A Γ ⊢SD A
Γ ⊢SD x : A
SD-V ar
Γ ⊢SD () : () SD-Unit
Γ ⊢SD v1 : A Γ ⊢SD v2 : B
Γ ⊢SD (v1, v2) : (A, B) SD-Pair
Γ, x : A ⊢SD c : C
Γ ⊢SD λx . c : A → C SD-Abs
SD-Handler
F ≡⟨⟩ labels (oprs) ;E α /∈ Γ Γ , α ⊢M return x 7→ cr : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ, α ⊢M oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩ Γ, α ⊢M fwd f p k 7→ cf : M α! ⟨E ⟩ Γ ⊢SD A
Γ ⊢SD handlerM {return x 7→ cr , oprs, fwd f p k 7→ cf } : A! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M A ! ⟨E ⟩
Figure 13: Syntax-directed value typing.
The syntax-directed system is obtained by incorporating the non-syntax-directed rules
into the syntax-directed-ones where needed. In particular, we inline the non-syntax-directed
rules for equivalence ( T-EqV and T-EqC) into the syntax-directed rules that mention the
same type or row twice in their assumptions (e.g., SD-App, SD-Do). Similarly, we inline
the rules T-Inst, T-InstEff, T-Gen and T-GenEff for instantiating and generalizing
type and row variables. The generalization is incorporated into the rule for let-bindings
(T-Let). Instantiation is incorporated into the variable rule ( T-V ar) using σ ⩽ A defined
in Figure 16.
Instantiation is also incorporated into the handler rule: we implicitly instantiate α with
an arbitrary type A, which results in a monomorphically typed handler. However, since
SD-Handler insists on sufficiency polymorphic handler clauses, we can still handle scoped
effects by polymorphic recursion.
Figure 17 displays declarative and syntax-directed typing derivations for both inline
handler application (with h handle c) as well as let-bound handlers. As can be seen in the
first derivation, in the case of inline handler application, the declarative system derives a
polymorphically typed handler, which is instantiated. The syntax-directed system essentially
combines these steps, as can be seen in the second derivation. In the case of a let-bound
handler, the declarative system keeps the polymorphic handler type as-is (third derivation).
The syntax-directed system however instantiates and then immediately generalizes handlers,
as can be seen in the fourth derivation.
The other rules of the declarative system are syntax-directed and remain unchanged.

--- PDF page 44 ---
17:44 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Γ ⊢SD c : C Computation Typing
Γ ⊢SD v1 : A1 → C Γ ⊢SD v2 : A2 A1 ≡ A2
Γ ⊢SD v1 v2 : C SD-App
Γ ⊢SD c1 : A! ⟨E1⟩ Γ, x : A ⊢SD c2 : B ! ⟨E2⟩ E1 ≡ E2
Γ ⊢SD do x ← c1 ; c2 : B ! ⟨E2⟩ SD-Do
Γ, α, µ ⊢SD v : A (α /∈ Γ) (µ /∈ Γ) Γ , x : ∀ α . ∀ µ . A ⊢SD c : C
Γ ⊢SD let x = v in c : C SD-Let
Γ ⊢SD v : A
Γ ⊢SD return v : A! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Ret
Γ ⊢SD v : C1 ⇒ D1 Γ ⊢SD c : C2 C1 ≡ C2 D1 ≡ D2
Γ ⊢SD with v handle c : D2
SD-Hand
(ℓop : Aop _ Bop) ∈ Σ
Γ ⊢SD v : A1 Aop ≡ A1 Γ, y : Bop ⊢SD c : A! ⟨E ⟩ ℓop ∈ E
Γ ⊢SD op ℓop v (y . c) : A! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Op
(ℓsc : Asc _ Bsc) ∈ Σ Γ ⊢SD v : A1 Asc ≡ A1
Γ, y : Bsc ⊢SD c1 : B ! ⟨E1⟩ Γ, z : B ⊢SD c2 : A! ⟨E2⟩ E1 ≡ E2 ℓsc ∈ E2
Γ ⊢SD sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) : A! ⟨E2⟩ SD-Sc
Figure 14: Syntax-directed computation typing.

--- PDF page 45 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:45
Γ ⊢M return x 7→ cr : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ Γ ⊢M oprs : M A ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢M fwd f p k 7→ cf : M A ! ⟨E ⟩
Return-, operation-, and forwarding-clause typing
Γ, x : A1 ⊢SD cr : M A 2 ! ⟨E ⟩ A1 ≡ A2
Γ ⊢M return x 7→ cr : M A ! ⟨E2⟩ SD-Return Γ ⊢M · : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Empty
Γ ⊢M oprs : M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ (ℓop : Aop _ Bop) ∈ Σ
Γ, x : Aop, k : Bop → M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ ⊢ SD c : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩
M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ ≡ M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩
Γ ⊢M op ℓop x k 7→ c, oprs : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩ SD-OprOp
Γ ⊢M oprs : M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ (ℓsc : Asc _ Bsc) ∈ Σ β /∈ Γ
Γ, β, x : Asc, p : Bsc → M β ! ⟨E1⟩, k : β → M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ ⊢ SD c : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩
M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ ≡ M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩
Γ ⊢M sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, oprs : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩ SD-OprSc
α, β, γ, δ /∈ Γ Ap = α → M β ! ⟨E1⟩
A′
p = α → γ ! ⟨E1⟩ Ak = β → M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ A′
k = γ → δ! ⟨E1⟩
Γ, α, β, p : Ap, k : Ak , f : ∀ γ δ . (A′
p, A′
k) → δ! ⟨E1⟩ ⊢ SD cf : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩
M A 1 ! ⟨E1⟩ ≡ M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩ Γ ⊢SD A2
Γ ⊢M fwd f p k 7→ cf : M A 2 ! ⟨E2⟩ SD-Fwd
Figure 15: Syntax-directed handler typing.
σ ⩽ A σ-instantiation
A ⩽ A σ-Inst-Base
[B / α]σ ⩽ A
∀ α . σ ⩽ A σ-Inst-α
[E / µ] σ ⩽ A
∀ µ . σ ⩽ A σ-Inst-µ
Figure 16: σ-instantiation.

--- PDF page 46 ---
17:46 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
Γ, α ⊢SD oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢SD h : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ T-Handler Γ ⊢SD A
Γ ⊢SD h : A! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M A ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Inst Γ ⊢SD c : A! ⟨F ⟩
Γ ⊢SD with h handle c : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ T-Hand
Γ, α ⊢M oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩ Γ ⊢SD A
Γ ⊢SD hM : A! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M A ! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Handler Γ ⊢SD c : A! ⟨F ⟩
Γ ⊢SD with hM handle c : M A ! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Hand
Γ, α ⊢SD oprs : M α! ⟨E ⟩
Γ ⊢SD h : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ T-Handler Γ, x : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ ⊢ SD c : C
Γ ⊢SD let x = h in c : C T-Let
Γ, α, β ⊢M oprs : M β ! ⟨E ⟩
Γ, α ⊢SD α
Γ ⊢SD hM : α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ SD-Handler Γ, x : ∀ α . α! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M α! ⟨E ⟩ ⊢ SD c : C
Γ ⊢SD let x = hM in c : C SD-Let
Figure 17: Handler generalisation and instantiation

--- PDF page 47 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:47
Appendix E. Metatheory
E.1. Lemmas.
Lemma E.1 (Canonical forms).
• If · ⊢ SD v : A → C then v is of shape λx . c.
• If · ⊢ SD v : C ⇒ D then v is of shape h.
Lemma E.2 (Generalisation-equivalence). If σ1 ⩽ A1 and σ1 ≡ σ2, then there exists a A 2
such that A 1 ≡ A2 and σ2 ⩽ A2.
Lemma E.3 (Generalisation-instantiation). If Γ, α, µ ⊢SD v : A and ∀ α ∀ µ . A ⩽ B, then
Γ ⊢SD v : B.
Lemma E.4 (Preservation of types under term substitution) . Given Γ1, α, µ ⊢SD v : A1 and
A1 ≡ A2 we have that:
• If Γ1, x : ∀ α ∀ µ . A2, Γ2 ⊢SD c : C1, then there exists a C2 such that C1 ≡ C2 and
Γ1, Γ2 ⊢SD [v / x ] c : C2.
• If Γ1, x : ∀ α ∀ µ . A2, Γ2 ⊢SD v : B1, then there exists a B 2 such that B 1 ≡ B2 and
Γ1, Γ2 ⊢SD [v / x ] v : B2.
Proof. By mutual induction on the typing derivations. The only interesting case, SD-V ar,
requires us to show that, given Γ 1, x : ∀ α ∀ µ . A2, Γ2 ⊢SD y : B1, there exists a B2 such
that B1 ≡ B2 and Γ 1, Γ2 ⊢SD [v / x ] y : B2. If x ̸= y, it is trivial. If x = y, then
∀ α ∀ µ . A2 ⩽ B1, which means by Lemma E.2 there exists a B2 such that B1 ≡ B2 and
∀ α ∀ µ . A1 ⩽ B2, which means the result follows from Lemma E.3.
Lemma E.5 (Preservation of types under type substitution) . If Γ1, α, Γ2 ⊢SD c : C and
Γ1 ⊢SD B, then Γ1, [B / α] Γ2 ⊢SD c : [B / α] C.
Lemma E.6 (Unused binding insertion). If Γ1, Γ2 ⊢SD c : C and x /∈ c then Γ1, x :A, Γ2 ⊢SD
c : C.
Lemma E.7 (Handlers are polymorphic) . If Γ ⊢SD h : A! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M A ! ⟨E ⟩ and Γ ⊢SD B,
then Γ ⊢SD h : B ! ⟨F ⟩ ⇒ M B ! ⟨E ⟩.
Lemma E.8 (Op membership). If Γ ⊢SD oprs : C and op ℓop x k 7→ c ∈ oprs, then there
exists oprs 1 and oprs 2 such that oprs = oprs 1, op ℓop k ⊢SD c, oprs 2 and Γ ⊢SD op ℓop x k 7→
c, oprs 2 : C.
Lemma E.9 (Sc membership). If Γ ⊢SD oprs : C and (sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c) ∈ h, then
there exists oprs 1 and oprs 2 such that oprs = oprs 1, sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, oprs 2 and Γ ⊢SD
sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c, oprs 2 : C.
Lemma E.10 (Syntax-directed to Non-syntax-directed value typing). If Γ ⊢ v : ∀ α . ∀ µ . A
then Γ, α, µ ⊢SD v : A.
Lemma E.11 (Non-syntax-directed iff Syntax-directed). Γ ⊢ c : C ⇐ ⇒ Γ ⊢SD c : C.

--- PDF page 48 ---
17:48 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
E.2. Subject reduction.
Theorem 8.1 (Subject Reduction). If Γ ⊢ c : C and c ⇝ c′, then there exists a C′ such
that C ≡ C′ and Γ ⊢ c′ : C′.
Proof. By Lemma E.11 (above) and Theorem E.12 (below).
Theorem E.12 (Syntax-directed Subject Reduction). If Γ ⊢SD c : C and c ⇝ c′, then there
exists a C′ such that C ≡ C′ and Γ ⊢SD c′ : C′.
Proof. Assume, without loss of generality, that C = B !⟨F ⟩ for some B, F. Proceed by
induction on the derivation c ⇝ c′.
• E-AppAbs: Inversion on Γ ⊢SD (λx . c) v : B !⟨F ⟩ (SD-App) gives Γ ⊢SD λx . c : A1 →
B !⟨F ⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD v : A2 (2), and A1 ≡ A2 (3). Inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Abs) gives
Γ, x :A1 ⊢SD c :B ! ⟨F ⟩ (4), which means the goal follows from facts 2 and 4 and Lemma E.4.
• E-Let: Inversion on Γ ⊢SD let x = v in c : B !⟨F ⟩ (SD-Let) gives Γ ⊢SD v : A (1),
σ = gen (A, Γ) (2), and Γ , x : σ ⊢SD c : B ! ⟨F ⟩ (3), which means the goal follows from facts
1 and 3 and Lemma E.4.
• E-Do: Follows from the IH.
• E-DoRet: Inversion on Γ ⊢SD do x ← return v in c : B !⟨F2⟩ (SD-Do) gives Γ ⊢SD
return v : A!⟨F1⟩ (1) and Γ , x : A ⊢SD c : B !⟨F2⟩ (2). Inversion on (1) ( SD-Ret) gives
Γ ⊢SD v : A (3). The case follows from facts 2 and 4 and Lemma E.4.
• E-DoOp: Similar to E-DoSc. By inversion on Γ ⊢SD do x ← op ℓop v (y . c1) in c2 :
B ! ⟨F2⟩ (SD-Do) we have that Γ⊢SD op ℓop v (y . c1):A! ⟨F1⟩ (1), Γ, x:A ⊢SD c2:B ! ⟨F2⟩ (2),
and F1 ≡ F2 (3). From inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Op) it follows that ℓop : Aop _ Bop ∈ Σ
(4), Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (5), Aop ≡ A1 (6), Γ, y : Bop ⊢SD c1 : A!⟨F1⟩ (7), and ℓop ∈ F1 (8).
Lemma E.6 on (2) gives us Γ , y : Bop, x : A ⊢SD c2 : B ! ⟨F2⟩ (9). Facts 3, 7 and 9 and rule
SD-Do give us Γ, y : Bop ⊢SD do x ← c1 in c2 : B ! ⟨F2⟩ (10). Our goal then follows from
facts 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10 and rule SD-Op.
• E-DoSc: Similar to E-DoOp. By inversion on Γ ⊢SD do x ← sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) in c3:
B !⟨F3⟩ (SD-Do) we have that Γ ⊢SD sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) : A!⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ , x : A ⊢SD
c3 : B !⟨F3⟩ (2), and F2 ≡ F3 (2.1). From inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Sc) it follows that
ℓsc : Asc _ Bsc ∈ Σ (3), Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (4), Asc ≡ A1 (5), Γ, y : Bsc ⊢SD c1 : B ′ !⟨F1⟩ (6),
Γ, z : B ′ ⊢SD c2 : A! ⟨F2⟩ (7), F1 ≡ F2 (8), and ℓsc ∈ F2 (9). Lemma E.6 on (2) gives us
Γ, z : B ′, x : A ⊢SD c3 : B ! ⟨F3⟩ (10), which means facts 2.1, 7 and 10 and rule SD-Do give
us Γ, z : B ′ ⊢SD do x ← c2 in c3 : B ! ⟨F3⟩ (11). Our goal then follows from facts 3, 4, 5, 6,
8 9, and 11 and rule SD-Sc.
• E-Hand: Follows from the IH.
• E-HandRet: By inversion on Γ ⊢SD with h handle return v : B !⟨F2⟩ (SD-Hand) we
have that Γ ⊢SD h:C1 ⇒ B ! ⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD return v :C2 (2), and C1 ≡ C2 (3). Inversion
on fact 1 ( SD-Handler) gives B = M A 2, C1 = A2 !⟨E ⟩, and Γ , α ⊢M return x 7→
cr : M α!⟨F2⟩ (4). Based on fact (3) we get that C2 = A2 ′ !⟨E ′⟩, A2 ≡ A2 ′ (4), and
E ≡ E ′ (5). Inversion on fact 4 ( SD-Return) gives Γ, α, x : A1 ⊢SD cr : M α!⟨F2⟩ (5)
and A1 ≡ A2 (6). Inversion on fact 2 ( SD-Ret) gives Γ ⊢SD v : A2 ′ (7). From facts 4-8
and Lemma E.4, we get that Γ , α ⊢SD [v / x ] cr : M α! ⟨F2⟩ (8). We obtain our goal from
fact 8 and Lemma E.5.
• E-HandOp: By inversion on Γ ⊢SD with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) : B !⟨F2⟩ (SD-
Hand) we have that Γ ⊢SD h : C1 ⇒ B !⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD op ℓop v (y . c1) : C2 (2), and
C1 ≡ C2 (3). Inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Handler) gives B = M A 2, C1 = A2 !⟨E ⟩, and

--- PDF page 49 ---
Vol. 20:4 A CALCULUS FOR SCOPED EFFECTS & HANDLERS 17:49
Γ, α ⊢M oprs : M α! ⟨F2⟩ (4). Based on fact (3) we get that C2 = A2 ′ ! ⟨E ′⟩, A2 ≡ A2 ′
(4), and E ≡ E ′ (5). Inversion on fact 2 ( SD-Op) gives us ℓop : Aop _ Bop ∈ Σ (6),
Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (7), Aop ≡ A1 (8), Γ, y : Bop ⊢SD c1 : A2 ′ !⟨E ′⟩ (9), and ℓop ∈ E ′ (10). By
Lemma E.8 we get that Γ , α ⊢M op ℓop x k 7→ c, oprs 2 : M α!⟨F2⟩ (11). Inversion on
fact 11 ( SD-OprOp) gives that Γ , α ⊢M oprs : M α!⟨F1⟩ (12), (ℓop : Aop _ Bop) ∈ Σ
(13), Γ , α, x : Aop, k : Bop → M α!⟨F1⟩ ⊢ SD c : M α!⟨F2⟩ (14), and F1 ≡ F2 (15).
Facts 1, 4 and 9 in combination with constructors SD-Abs and ST-Hand gives us that
Γ ⊢SD λy . with h handle c1 : Bop → M A 2 !⟨F2⟩ (16). The goal follows from facts 7, 8,
14 and 16 and lemmas Lemmas E.4 and E.5.
• E-FwdOp By inversion on Γ ⊢SD with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) : B !⟨F2⟩ (SD-Hand)
we have that Γ ⊢SD h : C1 ⇒ B !⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD op ℓop v (y . c1) : C2 (2), and C1 ≡ C2
(3). Inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Handler) gives B = M A 2, and C1 = A2 !⟨E ⟩. Based on
fact (3) we get that C2 = A2 ′ !⟨E ′⟩, A2 ≡ A2 ′ (4), and E ≡ E ′ (5). Inversion on
fact 2 ( SD-Op) gives us ℓop : Aop _ Bop ∈ Σ (6), Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (7), Aop ≡ A1 (8),
Γ, y : Bop ⊢SD c1 : A2 ′ ! ⟨E ′⟩ (9), and ℓop ∈ E ′ (10). The goal follows from facts 1, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 10, constructors SD-Hand and SD-Op, and Lemma E.6.
• E-HandSc: By inversion on Γ ⊢SD with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) : B ! ⟨F2⟩ (SD-Hand)
we have that Γ ⊢SD h : C1 ⇒ B !⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD ℓsc v (y . c1) ( z . c2) : C2 (2), and
C1 ≡ C2 (3). Inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Handler) gives B = M A 2, C1 = A2 !⟨E1⟩, and
Γ, α ⊢M oprs : M α! ⟨F2⟩ (4). Based on fact (3) we get that C2 = A2 ′ ! ⟨E2⟩, A2 ≡ A2 ′
(5), and E1 ≡ E2 (6). Inversion on fact 2 ( SD-Sc) gives us ℓsc : Asc _ Bsc ∈ Σ (7),
Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (8), Asc ≡ A1 (9), Γ, y : Bsc ⊢SD c1 : A3 ! ⟨E3⟩ (10), Γ, z : A3 ⊢SD c2 : A2 ′ ! ⟨E2⟩
(11), E3 ≡ E2 (12), and ℓsc ∈ E2 (13). Lemma E.8 we get that Γ , α ⊢M op ℓop x k 7→
c, oprs 2 : M α! ⟨F2⟩ (13.1). Inversion on fact 13.1 ( SD-OprSc gives ℓsc ∈ Σ (14), β fresh
(15), Γ, α, β, x : Asc, p : Bsc → M β !⟨F3⟩, k : β → M α!⟨F3⟩ ⊢ SD c : M α!⟨F2⟩ (16), and
F2 ≡ F3 (17). Facts 1, 5, 6, 10 and 12, constructors SD-Abs and SD-Hand and
Lemmas E.6 and E.7 give us that Γ , β ⊢SD λy . with h handle c1 : p : Bsc → M β !⟨F2⟩
(18). Facts 1, 5, 6 and 11 and constructors SD-Abs and SD-Hand and Lemma E.6 give
us that Γ , β ⊢SD λz . with h handle c2 : β → M A 2 ! ⟨F2⟩ (19). The goal now follows from
facts 8, 9, 16, 17 and 18 and Lemma E.4.
• E-FwdSc By inversion on Γ ⊢SD with h handle op ℓop v (y . c1) : B !⟨F2⟩ (SD-Hand)
we have that Γ ⊢SD h : C1 ⇒ B !⟨F2⟩ (1), Γ ⊢SD ℓsc v (y . c1) ( z . c2) : C2 (2), and
C1 ≡ C2 (3). Inversion on fact 1 ( SD-Handler) gives B = M A 2, C1 = A2 !⟨E1⟩,
and Γ , α ⊢M fwd f p k 7→ cf : M α!⟨F2⟩ (4). Based on fact (3) we get that C2 =
A2 ′ !⟨E2⟩, A2 ≡ A2 ′ (5), and E1 ≡ E2 (6). Inversion on fact 2 ( SD-Sc) gives us
ℓsc : Asc _ Bsc ∈ Σ (7), Γ ⊢SD v : A1 (8), Asc ≡ A1 (9), Γ , y : Bsc ⊢SD c1 : A3 !⟨E3⟩
(10), Γ, z : A3 ⊢SD c2 : A2 ′ !⟨E2⟩ (11), E3 ≡ E2 (12), and ℓsc ∈ E2 (13). Inversion on
fact 4 ( SD-Fwd) gives Ap = α′ → M β ! ⟨F1⟩, A′
p = α′ → γ ! ⟨F1⟩, Ak = β → M A 4 ! ⟨F1⟩,
A′
k = γ → δ! ⟨F1⟩, Γ, α, α′, β, p:Ap, k:Ak , f :∀ γ δ . (A′
p, A′
k) → δ! ⟨F1⟩ ⊢ SD cf :M α! ⟨F2⟩ (14)
and M A 1 ! ⟨F1⟩ ≡ M α! ⟨F2⟩ (15). Facts 1, 6, 10 and 12, constructors SD-Abs and SD-
Hand and Lemmas E.6 and E.7 give us that Γ, α, y :Bsc ⊢SD with h handle c1:M A 3 ! ⟨F2⟩
(16) Facts 1, 6, 10 and 12, constructors SD-Abs and SD-Hand and Lemma E.6 give us
that Γ, α ⊢SD λz . with h handle c2 : A3 → M A 4 ! ⟨F2⟩ (17) Facts 7, 8, 9, 13, the fact that
ℓsc /∈ labels (oprs), constructors SD-Abs, SD-App and SD-V arand Lemma E.6 give us
that Γ, α, (p′, k ′):∀ γ δ . (Bsc → γ ! ⟨F1⟩, γ → δ! ⟨F1⟩) ⊢SD sc ℓsc v (y . p′ y) (z . k ′ z):δ! ⟨F1⟩
(18). Our goal then follows from facts 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and Lemma E.4.

--- PDF page 50 ---
17:50 R. Bosman, B. van den Berg, W. Tang, and T. Schrijvers Vol. 20:4
E.3. Progress.
Theorem 8.2 (Progress). If · ⊢ c : A! ⟨E ⟩, then either:
• there exists a computation c ′ such that c ⇝ c′, or
• c is in a normal form, which means it is in one of the following forms: (1) c = return v,
(2) c = op ℓop v (y . c′) where ℓop ∈ E , or (3) c = sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) where ℓsc ∈ E .
Proof. By Lemma E.11 (above) and Theorem E.13 (below).
Theorem E.13 (Syntax-directed Progress). If · ⊢ SD c : A! ⟨E ⟩, then either:
• there exists a computation c ′ such that c ⇝ c′, or
• c is in a normal form, which means it is in one of the following forms: (1) c = return v,
(2) c = op ℓop v (y . c′) where ℓop ∈ E , or (3) c = sc ℓsc v (y . c1) (z . c2) where ℓsc ∈ E .
Proof. By induction on the typing derivation · ⊢ SD c : C.
• SD-App: Here, · ⊢ SD v1 v2. Since v1 has type A → B !⟨F ⟩, by Lemma E.1 it must be of
shape λx . c, which means we can step by rule E-AppAbs.
• SD-Do: Here, · ⊢ SD do x ← c1 in c2 : C. By the induction hypothesis, c1 can either
step (in which case we can step by E-Do), or it is a computation result. Every possible
form has a corresponding reduction: if c1 = return v we can step by E-DoRet, if
c1 = op ℓop v (y . c) we can step by E-DoOp, and if sc ℓop v (y . c′
1) (z . c′
2) we can step
by E-DoSc.
• SD-Let: Here, · ⊢ SD let x = v in c : C, which means we can step by E-Let.
• SD-Ret, SD-Op, and SD-Sc: all of these are computation results (forms (1), (2), and
(3), resp.). Since they are well-typed, the scoping condition of ℓop or ℓsc must be satisfied.
• SD-Hand: Here · ⊢ SD with v handle c : M A ! ⟨F ⟩. By Lemma E.1, v is of shape h. By
the induction hypothesis, c can either step (in which case we can step by E-Hand), or it
is in a normal form. Proceed by case split on the three forms.
(1) Case c = return v. Since · ⊢ SD h : C ⇒ D, there must be some (return x 7→ cr) ∈ h
which means we can step by rule E-HandRet.
(2) Case c = op ℓop v (y . c′). Depending on ( op ℓop x k 7→ c) ∈ h we can step by
E-HandOp or E-FwdOp.
(3) Case c = sc ℓsc v (y . c1) ( z . c2). If ( sc ℓsc x p k 7→ c) ∈ h, we can step by
E-HandSc. If not, since · ⊢ SD h : C ⇒ D, there must be some ( fwd f p k 7→ cf ) ∈ h
which means we can step by rule E-FwdSc.