--- PDF page 1 ---
Latent Eﬀects for
Reusable Language Components
Extended Version
Birthe van den Berg 1[0000−0002−0088−9546], Tom Schrijvers1[0000−0001−8771−5559],
Casper Bach Poulsen 2[0000−0003−0622−7639], and
Nicolas Wu3[0000−0002−4161−985X]
1 KU Leuven, Belgium {birthe.vandenberg,tom.schrijvers}@kuleuven.be
2 Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands c.b.poulsen@tudelft.nl
3 Imperial College London, UK n.wu@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract. The development of programming languages can be quite
complicated and costly. Hence, much eﬀort has been devoted to the
modular deﬁnition of language features that can be reused in various
combinations to deﬁne new languages and experiment with their semantics.
A notable outcome of these eﬀorts is the algebra-based “datatypes ` a la
carte” (DTC) approach. When combined with algebraic eﬀects, DTC
can model a wide range of common language features. Unfortunately, the
current state of the art does not cover modular deﬁnitions of advanced
control-ﬂow mechanisms that defer execution to an appropriate point, such
as call-by-name and call-by-need evaluation, as well as (multi-)staging.
This paper deﬁnes latent eﬀects, a generic class of such control-ﬂow mech-
anisms. We demonstrate how function abstractions, lazy computations
and a MetaML-like staging can all be expressed in a modular fashion
using latent eﬀects, and how they can be combined in various ways to
obtain complex semantics. We provide a full Haskell implementation of
our eﬀects and handlers with a range of examples.
Keywords: eﬀect handlers, eﬀects, monads, modularity, staging
1 Introduction
Modern programming languages, be they general purpose or domain-speciﬁc,
can be built in a ﬂexible manner by composing simple, oﬀ-the-shelf language
components. It is attractive to build languages in this way as it is useful to
study language components in isolation. Furthermore, it reduces the cost of
developing new and improved programming languages. Indeed, reducing the
eﬀort of building languages to the eﬀort of composing oﬀ-the-shelf language
components for features such as function abstraction, exceptions or mutable state,
is likely to enable language designers with limited resources or expertise—e.g.,
domain experts—to build their own languages. Providing a modular deﬁnition
for these advanced language features enables a more widespread use of them,
especially in the development of domain-speciﬁc languages (DSLs).
arXiv:2108.11155v1  [cs.PL]  25 Aug 2021

--- PDF page 2 ---
2 van den Berg et al.
To build programming languages from reusable components, we need a frame-
work for deﬁning those components. Two promising techniques for such a frame-
work are Data Types ` a la Carte[23] (DTC) and Algebraic Eﬀects & Handlers [18]
(AE&H). Using these, language interpreters can be implemented in two steps:
Syntax
denote
− − − − →Eﬀects
handle
− − − − →Result
The ﬁrst step deﬁnes a denote function that maps the syntax of an object language
onto eﬀectful (monadic [13]) operations. By implementing denote using DTC, we
can seamlessly compose denote functions from isolated cases for diﬀerent Syntax
constructors.
In the second step, handle deﬁnes the semantics of eﬀectful operations and
their eﬀect interactions. Using AE&H allows cases of denote to be deﬁned in an
eﬀect polymorphic way; i.e., a case maps to a monad that has at least the relevant
operations, and possibly more. Furthermore, we can deﬁne handle functions for
diﬀerent eﬀects in isolation, and seamlessly compose them by nesting handlers.
Thus, DTC+AE&H provides a powerful framework for composing programming
languages from isolated components.
However, not all language fragments have an obvious modular deﬁnition
in terms of AE&H. Traditional algebraic eﬀects and scoped eﬀects [30] are
baking in assumptions about control-ﬂow and data-ﬂow. These assumptions
get in the way of expressing a modular semantics for some language features.
In particular, control-ﬂow mechanisms that defer execution, such as lambda
abstractions with eﬀectful bodies, lazy evaluation strategies, or (multi-)staging,
are neither algebraic [17] nor scoped. This implies that the only way to implement
these mechanisms is by means of sophisticated encodings that are often relatively
low-level and non-modular. As such, these control-ﬂow mechanisms present a
severe challenge for allowing non-experts to build programming languages by
composing oﬀ-the-shelf components.
This paper presents a novel form of eﬀects and handlers that addresses this
challenge: latent eﬀects and handlers . Latent eﬀect handlers defer the running
of side eﬀects, such that they are “latent” until handlers for all eﬀects have
been applied. This notion of eﬀects can be used to directly deﬁne handlers for
language components that defer execution, such as lambda abstractions with
eﬀectful bodies, lazy evaluation, and (multi-)staging.
After introducing the background (Section 2), our main contributions are:
– We introduce latent eﬀect trees, implemented using Haskell (Section 3).
– We show how to encode lambda abstraction and application in terms of latent
eﬀects. We illustrate how this allows us to deﬁne lambda abstraction with
eﬀectful bodies as a composable language component (Section 3).
– We illustrate how to compose languages from reusable components using
latent eﬀects by showing how to encode lazy evaluation (call-by-need and
call-by-name), and MetaML-like multi-staging (Section 4).

--- PDF page 3 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 3
– We provide an eﬀect library4 with syntax and semantics in Haskell for various
simple and advanced language features. These features can be used as isolated
components to construct languages (Section A).
Finally, we discuss related work (Section 5) and conclude (Section 6).
2 Background and Motivation
This section summarizes the state of the art in modular language deﬁnition by
means of DTC and AE&H, discusses the challenges and problems associated
with treating lambdas in this setting, and sketches how our new latent eﬀects
enable the integration of modular forms of advanced control-ﬂow eﬀects.
2.1 Modular Syntax and Semantics with Data Types ` a la Carte
Data types ` a la Carte [23] (DTC) solves the core problem of assembling language
deﬁnitions from isolated components. It solves this for both syntax and semantics
to be composed in a modular way. For an accessible introduction to DTC, we
refer to [23]; we summarize the key points here.
Firstly, the abstract syntax of a language is modularized into the syntax of
each isolated feature. This is achieved by deﬁning a recursive type Syntax S of
ASTs in terms of the shape S of its nodes. This shape S can be composed out of
shapes S1,. . . ,Sn of the individual features: S = S1 +... + Sn.
Secondly, the semantic function denote :: Syntax S → M that maps ASTs
Syntax S to their meaning M is modularized into the separate syntactic maps of
the individual features. This is done by parameterizing the recursive semantic
map of the AST with the semantic mapping of the individual nodes, denote =
fold denote S where denote S :: S M → M is composed out of the semantic maps:
denote S1 :: S1 M → M
denote Sn :: Sn M → M
denote S = denote S1 +... + denote Sn
This modular approach aﬀords great ﬂexibility to quickly assemble a range of
diﬀerent languages and to explore language design: features can be added or
removed, and their semantic maps can be changed. We use the DTC approach
extensively when deﬁning a library of eﬀects in Section 4.3.
Unfortunately, this approach comes with a serious limitation: to be able to
combine the semantic maps of diﬀerent features, they must agree on the semantic
domain M . This often prohibits the unanticipated combinations of features, even
due to small diﬀerences in their semantic domain, such as one feature requiring
access to an environment or store that the other feature does not expect.
Moggi [13] observed that many of the diﬀerences in semantic domains of
common language features, usually called (side-)eﬀects, can be captured in the
category-theoretical pattern of monads. Although not all monads compose, the
4 https://github.com/birthevdb/Latent-Eﬀect-and-Handlers.git.

--- PDF page 4 ---
4 van den Berg et al.
state of the art in modular monads, algebraic eﬀects and handlers (AE&H) [18],
is well-aligned with the DTC approach of modular language features.
In fact, AE&H tackles the problem of modularly deﬁning a monad in much
the same way DTC tackles the problem of modularly deﬁning a language. Indeed,
the API of the monad (its “syntax”) is modularized into separate eﬀects; the
category-theoretical concept of a free monad plays the role of an abstract syntax
of API calls. A modular meaning is assigned to the free monad by means of
semantic maps for the separate eﬀects. The key diﬀerence with DTC is that the
diﬀerent eﬀects do not all have to be mapped to the same semantics. Instead, by
means of “modular carriers” their semantics can be layered [20].
Whereas AE&H is used to deﬁne (simpler) language features, we use latent
eﬀects and handlers, which we introduce in Section 3, to modularly deﬁne more
complex language features.
2.2 Advanced, Non-Modular Control-Flow Eﬀects
The AE&H literature shows how to express a range of diﬀerent control-ﬂow eﬀects
such as exceptions, non-determinism and even call-with-current-continuation.
However, as traditional eﬀects and handlers rely on assumptions about data-ﬂow
and control-ﬂow, more advanced and complicated control-ﬂow eﬀects are missing,
such as call-by-name and call-by-need evaluation or multi-staging. These features
typically defer execution and are non-algebraic.
An operation is algebraic when it meets the following requirements:
1. It can be expressed as op ::D → ∀a.M a →... → M a where D represents the
non-computational parameters that the operation has, M is a monad with
algebraic operations, and each M a typed parameter represents a possible
continuation of the operation.
2. It satisﬁes the algebraicity property, which states that, no matter which
possible continuation mi we take, the continuation immediately transfers
control to the current continuation k.
(op d m 1 ... mn)> >= k ≡ op d (m1> >= k) ... (mn > >= k)
Although many operations are algebraic, there are many common control-
ﬂow operations that are not. For instance, catch :: ∀a.M a → M a → M a is
an operation that executes the computation in the ﬁrst argument, and if that
computation raises an exception, proceeds by executing the second argument.
The catch operation is not algebraic; i.e.,
(catch m1 m2)> >= k ̸≡ catch (m1> >= k) (m2> >= k)
since exceptions raised during evaluation of k should not be handled by m2.
The lack of support for control-ﬂow eﬀects such as exception handling, moti-
vated the development of scoped eﬀects [30]. An operation is scoped when it can
be expressed as having the following type:

--- PDF page 5 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 5
op :: D → ∀a.M a →... → M a → ∀b.(a → M b ) →... → (a → M b ) → M b
The universal quantiﬁcation over a restricts data ﬂow: for a given operation
op d m 1... mn k1...k m, it is only the possible continuations k1...k m that can
inspect values yielded by computations mi. The allowable destinations of data
produced by the computation are restricted to those determined by the operation.
The catch operation is compatible with this restriction: it can be implemented
as a scoped operation catch′ :: ∀a.M a → M a → ∀b.(a → M b ) → M b .
However, this pattern does not apply to more advanced control-ﬂow eﬀects for
which the data produced by a computation can be used outside of the operation.
For example, lambda abstractions delay the execution of computations in the
body of a function until the function is applied (or not, depending on dynamic
control- and data ﬂow). To support such deferred execution, the return type
V in the body of a lambda abstraction abstr :: String → M V → M V is
not universally quantiﬁed. Thus, abstr is not a scoped operation. It is also not
algebraic, as the equation abstr x m > >= k ≡ abstr x (m> >= k) would cause k
to be (wrongly) deferred, and could cause free variables in k to be captured.
Other control-ﬂow eﬀects, such as call-by-need and call-by-name evaluation and
multi-staging annotations for (dynamically) staging and unstaging code, defer
execution in a similar way, and are similarly neither scoped nor algebraic.
It is theoretically possible to deﬁne the control-ﬂow eﬀects discussed above,
by making the control ﬂow of all operations explicit; e.g., by writing interpreters
in continuation-passing style (CPS). However, the relatively low-level nature of
CPS and its non-modular style, make this approach fall short of our goal of
composing languages from simple, oﬀ-the-shelf components.
2.3 Our Approach: Latent Eﬀects
We provide modular support for advanced control-ﬂow eﬀects such as function
abstraction, with its diﬀerent evaluation semantics, and staging. Our solution
generalizes the approach of DTC and AE&H outlined above. In fact, it does
not require any changes to the DTC approach for modular abstract syntax
trees and modular semantic mapping. It only impacts the second part of the
pipeline, replacing AE&H with a more general notion oflatent eﬀects and handlers
(LE&H).
LE&H is based on a diﬀerent, more sophisticated structure than AE&H’s free
monad. This structure supports non-atomic operations (e.g., function abstraction,
thunking, quoting) that contain or delimit computations whose execution may
be deferred. Also, the layered handling is diﬀerent. The idea is still the same,
to replace bit by bit the structure of the tree by its meaning. Yet, while AE&H
grows the meaning around the shrinking tree, LE&H grows little “pockets of
meaning” around the individual nodes remaining in the tree, and not just around
the root. The latter supports deferred eﬀects because later handlers can still
re-arrange the semantic pockets created by earlier handlers.
LE&H are the ﬁrst to modularly express advanced control-ﬂow eﬀects, such
as staging and lambda abstractions, and provide diﬀerent handlers, e.g., for

--- PDF page 6 ---
6 van den Berg et al.
call-by-name and call-by-need evaluation. Moreover, they combine with existing
algebraic eﬀects to express varying semantics for a large range of languages.
3 Latent Eﬀects
This section presents latent eﬀects. Latent eﬀects generalize algebraic eﬀects to
include control-ﬂow mechanisms that defer computation. As our running example
we use lambda abstraction, which—as discussed in Section 2.2—is neither an
algebraic nor a scoped operation. We show that it can be deﬁned as a latent
eﬀect. We start from a non-modular version that we reﬁne in two steps. First we
add support for modular signatures, and then support for modular handlers.
3.1 Non-Modular Deﬁnition of Lambda Abstraction
First we provide a non-modular deﬁnition of the lambda abstraction eﬀect.
Monadic Syntax Tree The type LC v a is a non-modular monadic syntax tree
that supports three primitive operations for a de Bruijn indexed λ-calculus.
data LC v a where
Return :: a → LC v a
Var :: Int → (v → LC v a ) → LC v a
App :: v → v → (v → LC v a ) → LC v a
Abs :: LC v v → (v → LC v a ) → LC v a
Here, the v of LC v a is a value type parameter, and a represents the return
type of the computation. Thus Return x is a trivial computation that returns x.
Var i k retrieves the value of type v associated with the ith variable and passes
it to the continuation k. The application App v1 v2 k applies the value v1 to
the value v2 and passes the result to the continuation. Finally, Abs e k builds a
closure value out of the function body e and passes it to the continuation.
For example, we can represent the lambda expression ( λx → x) 1 as the
LC expression Abs (Var 0 Return) (λv → App v 1 Return). This computation
constructs an abstraction and passes it to the continuation as a (closure) value
v. The continuation applies v to 1 and passes the result to Return. The closure
retrieves the the value of variable with index 0 (i.e., x) and passes it to Return.
Handler The idea of a handler is to map the syntax tree onto its meaning. We
illustrate this on the LC v a type, where we use the type v = Closure for values.
data Closure1 where
Clos1 :: FunPtr1 → Env1 → Closure1
type Store1 = [LC Closure 1 Closure1 ]
type FunPtr1 = Int
type Env1 = [Closure1 ]
A closure contains a function pointer and an environment. The function pointer
is an index into a list of deferred computations (i.e., function bodies) that we

--- PDF page 7 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 7
call the (resumption) store. The environment is a list that maps the closure’s
parameters (which are indexes) onto their values.
Now we are ready to deﬁne the handler handleAbs as a function that, given
an initial environment and store, maps an LC Closure a computation onto its
meaning, which is a tuple of the result value of type a and the ﬁnal store.
handleAbs :: Env1 → Store1 → LC Closure 1 Closure1 → (Store1, Closure1 )
handleAbs r (Return x ) = ( r, x)
handleAbs env r (Var n k ) = handleAbs env r (k (env !! n))
handleAbs env r (App v 1 v2 k) = handleAbs env r′ (k v )
where (Clos1 fp env′) = v1
(r′, v) = handleAbs (v2 : env′) r (r !! fp)
handleAbs env r (Abs e k ) = handleAbs env r′ (k v )
where v = Clos1 (length r ) env
r′ = r + + [e ]
First, the leaf case of the handler returns the value in that leaf, supplemented
with the resumption store. Next, the variable case looks up the variable in the
environment and passes it to the continuation. Then, the application case unpacks
the closure, retrieves the corresponding function body from the resumption store
and applies it to the extended environment and store. The resulting value is
passed to the continuation. Finally, the abstraction case adds the function body
to the resumption store, creates a closure that indexes this new entry, and calls
the continuation on this closure value.
3.2 Modular Latent Eﬀect Signatures and Trees, Version 1
We now modularize the deﬁnition of LC by separating the recursive structure of
the monadic syntax from the node shapes of the Var, App and Abs operations.
Latent Eﬀect Signature We call the node shapes the latent eﬀect signature. In
this case, it is called Abstracting v with v the type of values.
data Abstracting v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Var′ :: Int → Abstracting v v NoSub
App′ :: v → v → Abstracting v v NoSub
Abs′ :: Abstracting v v (OneSub v )
Besides its ﬁrst parameter v, the type Abstracting v p c is indexed by two further
parameters: The parameter p is the return type of the primitive operations; this is
the type of value they pass to their continuation. As all three primitive operations
return a value of type v, we have thatp = v. The parameter c::∗ → ∗ captures the
number and result type of the subcomputations. As Var′ and App′ have no sub-
computations, they use the type c = NoSub to indicate that. However, Abs′ has
a subcomputation and it indicates this with c = OneSub v. This subcomputation
is the body of the function abstraction, whose return type is v. Hence, OneSub v

--- PDF page 8 ---
8 van den Berg et al.
has one constructor One :: OneSub v v .
data NoSub :: ∗ → ∗where
data OneSub v :: ∗ → ∗where
One :: OneSub v v
Latent Eﬀect Tree, Version 1 The type Tree1 σ a extends a latent eﬀect signature
σ into a recursive syntactic structure that is a monad in a.
data Tree1 (σ :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗) a where
Leaf 1 :: a → Tree1 σ a
Node1 ::σ p c → (∀x.c x → Tree1 σ x) → (p → Tree1 σ a) → Tree1 σ a
The Leaf 1 constructor is trivial; Leaf 1 x returns a pure computation with result
x. The internal nodes are of the form Node op sub k where the ﬁelds have
the following meaning. The ﬁrst, op, identiﬁes what primitive operation the
node represents. Next, sub is a function that, in case of a non-atomic primitive,
selects the subcomputations of the node. Finally, k is the continuation of further
operations to perform after the current one.
Some notable characteristics are as follows:
– Every operation has a result type p that is made available to its continuation,
and a number of subcomputations c. To model these two, the signature of
an operation op ::σ p c is parameterized by p and c.
– The function sub has type ∀x.c x → Tree1 σ x. The input of type c x
determines what subcomputation to select; the parameter x indicates the
result type of that subcomputation.
– Likewise, continuations take as input the operation’s output value ( p).
– The Tree1 data type is monadic, with a similar notion of return and bind as
the free monad [23]:
instance Monad (Tree1 σ) where
return = Leaf 1
(Leaf 1 x)> >= f = f x
(Node1 op sub k )> >= f = Node1 op sub (λx → k x > >= f )
A monadic binding t > >= f thus “concatenates” the tree in f to the leaf
positions in the continuation (only) of t.
We can emulate the non-modular type LC v a with LC′ v a .
type LC′ v a = Tree1 (Abstracting v ) a
The corresponding representation for LC′s Return constructor is Leaf 1. The Var
constructor is represented with a Node1.
var 1 :: Int → (v → LC′ v a ) → LC′ v a
var 1 i k = Node1 (Var′ i) (λx → case x of ) k

--- PDF page 9 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 9
var :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ Int → Tree1 σ v
var n = Node1 (injSig (Var′ n)) (λx → case x of ) Leaf 1
app :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ v → v → Tree1 σ v
app v 1 v2 = Node1 (injSig (App′ v1 v2)) (λx → case x of ) Leaf 1
abs :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ Tree1 σ v → Tree1 σ v
abs t = Node1 (injSig Abs ′) (λOne → t) Leaf 1
Fig. 1: The modular constructor functions of the Abstracting eﬀect. These func-
tions all ﬁx the continuation toLeaf 1, which can easily be replaced by an arbitrary
continuation k using the > >= operator of Tree1’s monad instance.
This is a Var′ i node. As there are no subcomputations, there are no branches
in the pattern match in the selection function on the value x of the empty type
NoSub. Lastly, the continuation k receives the value produced by the operation.
The encodings of the two other operations are similar. One notable aspect
of abs 1 is that it does have one subcomputation. Hence, the selection function
matches on the One constructor and returns t:
app1 :: v → v → (v → LC′ v a ) → LC′ v a
app1 v1 v2 k = Node1 (App′ v1 v2) (λx → case x of ) k
abs 1 :: LC′ v v → (v → LC′ v a ) → LC′ v a
abs 1 t k = Node1 Abs′ (λOne → t) k
Modular Tree Constructors We can create modular constructors for latent eﬀect
operations, similarly to how DTC admits modular syntax constructors [23]. To this
end, we use a co-product operator + that combines latent eﬀect signatures, and a
subtyping relationσ1<σ 2 with an associated injection function, injSig ::σ1 p c →
σ2 p c . Using these, we can implement the modular constructor functions in
Figure 1, that allow combining Abstracting with other latent and algebraic eﬀects.
The subtyping requirements in the type signatures are automatically inferrable
by type class instance resolution in Haskell. The implementation details of + and
< are given in Section A.
We can now use these modular constructors to implement denotation function
cases. We can also write programs using the constructors directly. For example,
the following program with a lambda abstraction with an eﬀectful body:
prog :: ∀v.Num v ⇒ Tree1 (Mutating v + Abstracting v + Ending) v
prog = do
put (1 :: v)
f ← abs (do m ← var 0; (n :: v) ← get; return (m + n))
put (2 :: v)
app f (3 :: v)
The body of the function abstraction increments the function argument value
(de Bruijn index 0) by the n yielded by the get operation. The signature of

--- PDF page 10 ---
10 van den Berg et al.
the program tree is the co-product of three signatures: (1) Mutating V for
mutable state; (2) function abstractions Abstracting V ; and (3) the empty
signature Ending, which provides no operations and serves as the base case. The
Mutating V eﬀect recasts the traditional algebraic state eﬀect as a latent eﬀect,
and has two operations, get and put. Observe that prog is essentially an AST,
with multiple possible interpretations. If Mutating V is dynamic (runtime) state,
then prog evaluates to 3 + 2 = 5. However, if it is for macro bindings that are
expanded statically, then the get in the body of the abstraction is evaluated
under the state at the “deﬁnition site” of the lambda, and prog evaluates to
3 + 1 = 4. Next, we show how handlers can map the prog syntax tree to diﬀerent
semantics.
3.3 Trees with Support for Modular Handlers
In the case of a modularly composed signature σ =σ1 +... +σn + Ending, the
idea is to compose the handler function from individual handlers for the diﬀerent
components of the signature h = hEnd ◦ hn ◦... ◦ h1. The type of each handler
would be hi :: ∀σ.Tree1 (σi +σ) a → Tree1 σ (Li a). Hence, it is polymorphic in
the remaining part of the signature and preserves those nodes in the resulting
tree. It only replaces the nodes of σi with their meaning, which is given in the
form of a functor Li that decorates the result type a.
Unfortunately, our Tree1 type and, in particular, the type of its Node1 con-
structor, needs some further reﬁnement to fully support this idea. Indeed, if the
signature isσi+σ, and we apply hi to all the recursive occurrences of Tree (σi+σ)
in a σ-node Node1 (Inr′ op) sub k , we get:
Before applying hi
Inr′ op :: (σi +σ) p c
sub :: ∀x.c x → Tree1 (σi +σ) x
k :: p → Tree1 (σi +σ) a
After applying hi
op ::σ p c
hi ◦ sub :: ∀x.c x → Tree1 σ ( Li x )
hi ◦ k :: p → Tree1 σ (Li a)
The resulting ﬁelds do not together form a node of type Tree1 σ (Li a) because
the highlighted result type of the subcomputations is ( Li x) rather than x which
the Node1 constructor requires sub to have as return type.
The problem is that the Tree1 type is oblivious to the eﬀect functor that
the return type of subcomputations in the tree are decorated by. To solve this
problem, we can expose the eﬀect functor decoration in the tree type itself; e.g.,
data Tree2 (σ :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗) ( l :: ∗ → ∗ ) a where
Leaf 2 :: a → Tree2 σ l a
Node2 ::σ p c → (∀x.c x → Tree2 σ l ( l x ))
→ ( l p → Tree2 σ l a ) → Tree2 σ l a
But the Tree2 type requires eﬀect handlers to be applied to subcomputations
immediately. Motivated by modeling constructs that defer computation, we
generalize the type further by parameterizing subcomputations by the eﬀect

--- PDF page 11 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 11
functor state, and making each node “remember” the eﬀect state (the latent
eﬀects):
data Tree (σ :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗) (l :: ∗ → ∗ ) a where
Leaf :: a → Treeσ l a
Node ::σ p c → l () → (∀x.c x → l () → Treeσ l (l x ))
→ (l p → Treeσ l a ) → Treeσ l a
In section 3.4 we discuss how Tree supports deferring computation. Tree is a
monad with a return and bind deﬁned similarly to the ones for Tree1 in section
3.2. We can also deﬁne modular tree constructors using similar techniques as
in section 3.2. For instance, using Tree instead of Tree1, the type of prog from
Section 3.2 becomes:
prog :: Tree (Mutating V + Abstracting V + Ending) Id V
Here, the Id functor models the absence of latent eﬀects in the tree. The type V
represents a concrete value type.
Example Figure 2 shows how the type of the prog tree evolves when applying
successive handlers for the three parts of the signature:
(hEnd ◦ hAbs [ ] [ ]◦ hMut 0) prog
First, we run the modular handler for mutable state Mutating s, which has type:
hMut :: Functor l ⇒ s → Tree (Mutating s +σ) l a → Treeσ (StateL s l ) (s, a)
Given an initial state of type s, this handler transforms a tree into another tree.
The signature of the tree evolves from Mutating s +σ to σ because the handler
interprets the mutable state, but not the other eﬀects. Also, the latent eﬀect
functor evolves from l (the latent eﬀects already present) to StateL s l , which
augments l with the value of the intermediate state.
newtype StateL s l a = StateL {unStateL :: (s, l a )}
The result type evolves from a to (s, a), which augments it with the ﬁnal state.
Second, the handler for Abstracting V behaves similarly to hMut, removing
itself from the signature and growing the latent eﬀect functor. Finally, hEnd
handles the Ending base case. It takes a tree with an empty signature, which
thus necessarily only contains a leaf, and extracts the ﬁnal result out of it.
hEnd :: Tree Ending l a → a
hEnd (Leaf x ) = x
The remainder of this section illustrates how modular handlers are imple-
mented.

--- PDF page 12 ---
12 van den Berg et al.
Tree (Mutating Int +Abstracting V + Ending) Id V
↓ hMut 0
Tree (Abstracting V +Ending) ( StateL Int Id ) ( Int, V )
↓ hAbs [ ] [ ]
Tree (Ending) ( StateL (Store Ending (StateL Int Id ) V ) ( StateL Int Id )
( Store Ending (StateL Int Id ) V , (Int, V ))
↓ hEnd
(Store Ending (StateL Int Id ) V , (Int, V ))
Fig. 2: The type of prog after successive handling steps.
3.4 Example: Two Modular Handlers for Function Abstractions
We implement two diﬀerent modular handlers for the operations in Abstracting,
which illustrate (1) how latent eﬀects let us write handlers for function abstraction,
and (2) the kind of ﬁne-grained control the handlers provide. The ﬁrst handler we
consider evaluates the body of a function abstraction using the latent eﬀects of
its call site. Hence, the evaluation of side-eﬀectful operations is postponed until
the function is applied. The second handler evaluates the body of the function
abstraction using the latent eﬀects of its deﬁnition site. This immediately enacts
the latent eﬀects introduced by previously-applied handlers.
Modular Closure Values A concern that arises when we step away from
the earlier non-modular handler for Abstracting is reuse. Notably, in a modular
setting we want to allow reuse of both handlers with diﬀerent notions of values.
For that reason, they are parameterized in the type of values v. This type may
comprise various shapes of values; all the function abstraction handlers require is
that closures are one possible shape of value.
To express this requirement, we introduce another type class v1 <: v2 for
subtyping, this time at kind ∗, which witnesses (1) that any v1 can be “upcast”
to the type v2; and (2) that a v2 can be “downcast” to type v1. The latter may
fail, but the former does not. The minimal requirement for lambda abstractions
is that the value type includes closure values.
class v1<: v2 where
inj v :: v1 → v2
proj v :: v2 → Maybe v1
data Closure v where
Clos :: FunPtr → Env v → Closure v
type Env v = [v ]
In the modular setting, the types Closure v and Env v, of respectively closures
and value environments, are parameterized in the type of values used.
Modular Resumption Store Recall that the resumption store keeps track
of the function bodies whose execution has been deferred; i.e., it is a list of

--- PDF page 13 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 13
resumptions. In the modular setting, the type of resumptions is parametric in
the speciﬁc type of signature, latent eﬀect functor and value type.
type Storeσ l v = [Rσ l v ]
Moreover, depending on whether we want to handle latent eﬀects on the call site
or deﬁnition site, the deﬁnition of a resumption diﬀers.
A resumption of a call-site eﬀect is a function that takes an l () input, which
is the latent eﬀect context of the call site where the resumption is evaluated.
type RCS σ l v = l () → Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l (l v )
The resumptions of a deﬁnition-site eﬀect store are trees instead of functions
that produce trees. Indeed, they have no dependency on the latent eﬀects of the
call site. Instead, they have been fully determined by the deﬁnition site.
type RDS σ l v = Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l (l v )
Although the resumption store makes the handlers verbose, it is a more modular
solution than storing Trees in values.
Modular Handlers Figure 3 shows the modular handler hAbsCS that uses the
call-site latent eﬀects when executing a function body 5.
Compared to the non-modular deﬁnition, there are several diﬀerences. Firstly,
the handler only interprets part of the work and thus returns the remaining
tree instead. Hence, the Leaf case now returns a new leaf, and the other cases
use monadic do-notation to build a new tree. Secondly, because the signature
is a composition and the resulting value type is too, the pattern matching on
operations involves the Inl′ and Inr′ tags of the + co-product. The pattern
matching and construction of values involves inj v and proj v calls for the same
reason. Thirdly, the latent eﬀects now matter and need to be properly threaded
in all the operation cases. Finally, there is an additional operation case, to handle
unknown operations from the remaining part of the signature by “forwarding”
them, i.e., copying them to the resulting tree for later handling.
As discussed, in a modular setting a second handler is possible: one that
uses the latent eﬀects of the deﬁnition site for function bodies rather than their
call site. This deﬁnition-site handler, hAbsDS, looks much like its sibling. The
key diﬀerence is the type of resumptions, which aﬀects the code in two places
(highlighted in gray). Firstly, the abstraction case applies the subtree function
to the latent eﬀect of the deﬁnition site instead of deferring the application
(st One l instead of st One ). Dually, the application case does not have to apply
the resumption to the call-site latent eﬀect ( r !! p instead of (r !! p) l).
5 The function (<$) is short for fmap ◦ const

--- PDF page 14 ---
14 van den Berg et al.
hAbsCS :: (Closure v <: v, Functor l )
⇒ Env v → Storeσ l v → Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (StateL (Storeσ l v ) l) (Storeσ l v, a)
hAbsCS r (Leaf x ) = Leaf (r, x)
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl ′ Abs′) l st k ) = do let v = inj v (Clos (length r ) nv)
let r ′ = r + + [st One ]
hAbsCS nv r ′ (k (v <$ l))
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl ′ (App′ v1 v2)) l k) = case proj v v1 of
Just (Clos fp nv ′) → do (r ′, v) ← hAbsCS (v2 : nv ′) r ( (r !! fp) l )
hAbsCS nv r ′ (k v )
Nothing → error "application error"
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl ′ (Var′ n)) l k) = hAbsCS nv r (k ((nv !! n)<$ l))
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inr ′ op) l st k ) = Node op (StateL (r, l))
(λc (StateL (r ′, l )) → StateL<$> hAbsCS nv r ′ (st c l ))
(λ (StateL (r ′, lv )) → hAbsCS nv r ′ (k lv ))
Fig. 3: Modular call-site abstraction handler. The gray highlights indicate the
places where it diﬀers from a deﬁnition-site handler.
Example With the abstraction handlers in place, let us revisit the prog example.
We run the handlers with default initial values, i.e., 0 for the state, the empty
variable environment and the empty resumption store. When using the call-site
abstraction handler after the state handler, the function body uses the value of
the state that was written right before its invocation.
> example CS = inspect $ hEnd $ hAbsCS [ ] [ ] $hMut 0 prog
5
If we use the deﬁnition-site handler instead, the function body uses the state
value that was written right before the abstraction was created.
> example DS = inspect $ hEnd $ hAbsDS [ ] [ ] $hMut 0 prog
4
4 Case Study
This section reports on a case study implementation of a library with a range of
modular eﬀects (Section A), and two advanced control-ﬂow features implemented
using this library: call-by-need lambdas (section 4.1) and multi-staging (section
4.2). For the source code of these case studies, we refer to the implementation avail-
able at https://github.com/birthevdb/Latent-Effect-and-Handlers.git.

--- PDF page 15 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 15
4.1 Call-by-Need Evaluation
We have implemented two diﬀerent evaluation strategies, call-by-need (lazy) and
call-by-value (CBV), for lambdas by using diﬀerent latent eﬀect handlers. Our
approach is inspired by Levy’s call-by-push-value [10], which can express both
strategies. We summarize here; Appendix B has all the details.
Call-by-need evaluation lazily delays the evaluation of argument expressions
of function applications, and uses memoization to ensure that evaluation only
happens once for delayed expressions. We build a lazy semantics for function
abstractions out of three primitive eﬀects:
1. The Reading eﬀect corresponds to the well-known reader monad from the
Haskell monad transformer library [11].
2. The Suspending eﬀect delays the evaluation of function bodies, without
memoizing the result of the evaluation of the delayed subtrees.
3. The Thunking eﬀect delays the evaluation of argument expressions of function
applications, memoizing the result of forcing a thunked computation.
The deﬁnition of these eﬀects and their handlers can be found in the eﬀect library
of Appendix A. Using these eﬀects, Appendix B.2 deﬁnes three operations for
lazy evaluation (abs lazy, var lazy, and applazy). Lambda abstraction suspends the
body of a lambda, and pairs a pointer to the suspension with the environment
that the thunk should be evaluated under. The var lazy and applazy functions
memoize and recall argument values (possibly by forcing the evaluation of a
thunked computation), and evaluate the body of a lambda. Application evaluates
the ﬁrst argument to a function value, and memoizes the second argument, which
is placed in the current environment. Then, the function body is executed.
The following example program evaluates to 0 when using lazy evaluation:
proglazy :: Tree ( Mutating V + Reading [V ] + Suspending V
+ Thunking V + Ending) Id V
proglazy = applazy (abs lazy get) (do put 42; get)
Function application delays the evaluation of put in the argument, and is never
executed because the function body does not reference its parameter.We can run
the program with call-by-need by applying its handlers:
> inspect $ hEnd $ hThunk [ ] $hSuspend [ ] $hRead [ ] $hMut 0 proglazy
0
The inspect function extracts the ﬁnal value out of the result that is decorated
with the latent eﬀect functor (in this case nested StateL’s).
We can also recover a CBV semantics from applazy, abs lazy, and applazy by
implementing an alternative handler for the Thunking eﬀect. This handler eagerly
evaluates subtrees and stores their value in a store.
> inspect $ hEnd $ hEager [ ] $hSuspend [ ] $hRead [ ] $hMut 0 proglazy
42

--- PDF page 16 ---
16 van den Berg et al.
run < print " bar " ;
1 + ~( print " foo " ; <2 >) >
letbind (seq (print "foo") ( quote (num 2)))
(unquote (quote (seq (print "bar")
(add (num 1) ( splice (var 0))))))
Fig. 4: A MetaML program (left) and its latent eﬀects implementation (right).
This case study demonstrates that modular call-by-need can be implemented by
decomposing it into modular, primitive latent eﬀects and handlers. It also shows
how overloading the handler of the Thunking eﬀect provides a means of changing
the semantics of a program without touching the program itself.
4.2 Staging
Another advanced control-ﬂow feature that we have implemented with latent
eﬀects is multi-staging. By applying eﬀect handlers before the handler for the
staging eﬀect, we can control which eﬀects should be staged, and which not. The
implementation of these staging constructs can be found in Appendix C.
Our inspiration are the three constructs of MetaML [26]: (1) bracket expres-
sions (<_>) delay execution to a later stage; (2) escape expressions (~_) splice a
staged expression into another; and (3) run expressions (run _ ) run an expression
that has been dynamically generated by bracket and escape expressions.
A key feature of MetaML is that staged code is statically typed and lexically
scoped. The staging constructs that we implement diﬀer in two ways: our staging
constructs are untyped, and we provide two constructs for splicing code ( push
and splice) instead of the single escape expression found in MetaML.
We use push for writing programs with escape expressions under binders in
staged code. The dynamic semantics of push creates an environment with “holes”
that represent unknown bindings, and splice automatically ﬁlls in these holes
with bindings from the dynamic context of the splice expression.
The four staging constructs we implement are thus: (1) quote, corresponding
to brackets in MetaML; (2) unquote, corresponding to run _ in MetaML; and
(3+4) splice and push for code splicing. The programs in section 4 illustrate the
diﬀerence in how splicing works. The MetaML program on the left prints the
string "foobar" and returns the value 3. The program on the right desugars into
latent eﬀects. With the appropriate handlers, it gives the same output.
Yet, by switching the order of handlers for the print eﬀect and staging, we
obtain a diﬀerent semantics that eagerly handles print operations inside quoted
code. This makes the program on the right print "barfoo" instead.
4.3 Library Summary
We have given two examples where latent eﬀects can be modularly composed
to form language features. Figure 5 gives an overview of our eﬀect library in
Appendix A and how the primitive eﬀects are combined into language features.
The left part shows the general framework code for implementing latent
eﬀects, consisting of Trees, the DTC approach and helper deﬁnitions (e.g. Id,

--- PDF page 17 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 17
Fig. 5: Eﬀect Library with Lines of Code (LoC) per Eﬀect.
Void); the ﬁgure also indicates the associated lines of code (LoC). The middle
part shows ten diﬀerent eﬀects and their LoC. Each eﬀect comes with an eﬀect
signature, a handler, and smart constructors for their operations. For the detailed
implementation of these eﬀects, we refer to the eﬀect library (Section A). The
right part contains several language features that can be implemented using these
eﬀects, with their associated LoC. Each feature comes with its object language
syntax and a mapping onto the eﬀects. Each language requires an additional two
LoC, to indicate the eﬀects and handlers used and their order. A diﬀerent order
of eﬀects and handlers may give diﬀerent semantics.
Figure 5 only includes a few language features covered in the paper. However,
as we provide ten eﬀects and handlers, they can be modularly composed in
diﬀerent order, using diﬀerent combinations. In theory, when algebras are ﬁxed,
we can deﬁne (10! + 9! + ... + 2! + 1!) = 4,037,913 semantics, although some
compositions may result in the same behaviour. Even more variations are possible,
varying the algebra that maps the object language syntax to the eﬀects.
5 Related Work
Modular Semantics and Eﬀects Modularity has received much attention both
at the level of language deﬁnitions and of the eﬀects used by those languages.
A landmark is the formulation of the expression problem [27], the challenge
to modularly extend languages with new features and new interpretation func-
tions. As diﬀerent language features use diﬀerent eﬀects, this also requires the
modular composition of those eﬀects. Monad transformers [11] are the most
prominent approach, including alternative implementations such as Filinksi’s
layered monads [3] and Jaskelioﬀ’s Monatron [7].
Algebraic Eﬀects Algebraic eﬀects [16] have been proposed as a more structured
approach to monads that can also be composed [6]. The subsequent introduction

--- PDF page 18 ---
18 van den Berg et al.
of handlers [18] to deal with exceptions has enabled practical language and library
implementations, e.g., [8, 12, 9]. Schrijvers et al. [20] identiﬁed when algebraic
eﬀect handlers are modular and related this to a subclass of monad transformers,
using the notion of modules [15]. Wu et al. [30] have identiﬁed a class of what
they call scoped eﬀects, which cannot be expressed as algebraic operations. To
remedy the situation, they have proposed a practical generalization of algebraic
eﬀects. Pir´ og et al. [14] have put this ad-hoc approach for scoped eﬀects on formal
footing in terms of a free monad on a level-indexed category.
Latent Eﬀects There are many works on speciﬁc types of latent eﬀects. For
instance, staging is a widely studied area [19, 25, 22]. Some works have also
combined algebraic eﬀects with staging mechanisms [31, 21, 28]. Yet, we are, to
the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst to consider staging using eﬀect handlers.
The call-by-push-value calculus of Levy [10] provides primitives for expressing
both call-by-name and call-by-value. These have been an inspiration for our
modular thunking handler. A more generic work is that of Atkey and Johann [1]
on interleaving data and eﬀects to model the incremental production of the data,
and on interpreting these with f-and-m algebras.
Various forms of delimited control have been used in the literature to realize
sophisticated control mechanisms, such as the simulation of call-by-need by Garcia
et al. [5]. Moreover, several works [4] show the interdeﬁnability of conventional
algebraic eﬀects and delimited control. A further investigation into the relative
expressiveness of latent eﬀects would be interesting.
In future work we would like to demonstrate the performance of latent eﬀects,
using the techniques of fusion by Wu and Schrijvers [29].
6 Conclusion
This paper has introduced the notion of latent eﬀects. These extend algebraic
eﬀects with the ability to modularly model advanced control-ﬂow mechanisms
that can postpone the execution of certain computations and require ﬁne-grained
control over the eﬀects inside them. Lambda abstraction, lazy evaluation, and
staging were shown to be three prominent instances.
Acknowledgments This work has been supported by EPSRC grant number
EP/S028129/1 on ‘Scoped Contextual Operations and Eﬀects’, by the NWO
VENI project on ‘Composable and Safe-by-Construction Programming Language
Deﬁnitions’ (VI.Veni.192.259), by FWO project G095917N, and KU Leuven
project C14/20/079.
References
1. Atkey, R., Johann, P.: Interleaving data and eﬀects. J. Funct. Program. 25 (2015)
2. de Bruijn, N.: Telescopic mappings in typed lambda calculus. Information and
Computation 91(2), 189–204 (1991)

--- PDF page 19 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 19
3. Filinski, A.: Representing layered monads. In: 26th symposium on Principles of
programming languages. pp. 175–188. POPL ’99 (1999)
4. Forster, Y., Kammar, O., Lindley, S., Pretnar, M.: On the expressive power of
user-deﬁned eﬀects: Eﬀect handlers, monadic reﬂection, delimited control. J. Funct.
Program. 29, e15 (2019)
5. Garcia, R., Lumsdaine, A., Sabry, A.: Lazy evaluation and delimited control. Log.
Methods Comput. Sci. 6(3) (2010)
6. Hyland, M., Plotkin, G., Power, J.: Combining eﬀects: Sum and tensor. Theoretical
Computer Science 357(1-3), 70–99 (2006)
7. Jaskelioﬀ, M.: Monatron: An extensible monad transformer library. In: IFL. LNCS,
vol. 5836, pp. 233–248. Springer (2011)
8. Kiselyov, O., Ishii, H.: Freer monads, more extensible eﬀects. In: 8th Symposium
on Haskell. pp. 94–105. ACM (2015)
9. Leijen, D.: Type directed compilation of row-typed algebraic eﬀects. In: 44th
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. p. 486–499. ACM (2017)
10. Levy, P.B.: Call-by-push-value: Decomposing call-by-value and call-by-name. Higher-
Order and Symbolic Computation 19(4), 377–414 (2006)
11. Liang, S., Hudak, P., Jones, M.: Monad transformers and modular interpreters. In:
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. pp. 333–343. ACM (1995)
12. Lindley, S., McBride, C., McLaughlin, C.: Do be do be do. In: 44th Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages. ACM (2017)
13. Moggi, E.: An abstract view of programming languages. Tech. Rep. ECS-LFCS-90-
113, Edinburgh University, Department of Computer Science (June 1989)
14. Pir´ og, M., Schrijvers, T., Wu, N., Jaskelioﬀ, M.: Syntax and semantics for operations
with scopes. In: Logic in Computer Science. pp. 809–818. ACM (2018)
15. Pir´ og, M., Wu, N., Gibbons, J.: Modules over monads and their algebras. In: 6th
Conference on Algebra and Coalgebra in Computer Science. LIPIcs, vol. 35, pp.
290–303. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik (2015)
16. Plotkin, G., Power, J.: Notions of computation determine monads. In: Foundations
of Software Science and Computation Structures. pp. 342–356. Springer (2002)
17. Plotkin, G.D., Power, J.: Algebraic operations and generic eﬀects. Applied Categor-
ical Structures 11(1), 69–94 (2003)
18. Plotkin, G.D., Pretnar, M.: Handlers of algebraic eﬀects. In: 18th European Sym-
posium on Programming. LNCS, vol. 5502, pp. 80–94. Springer (2009)
19. Rompf, T., Odersky, M.: Lightweight modular staging: a pragmatic approach to
runtime code generation and compiled dsls. In: Generative Programming And
Component Engineering. pp. 127–136. ACM (2010)
20. Schrijvers, T., Pir´ og, M., Wu, N., Jaskelioﬀ, M.: Monad transformers and modular
algebraic eﬀects: what binds them together. In: 12th International Symposium on
Haskell. pp. 98–113. ACM (2019)
21. Schuster, P., Brachth¨ auser, J.I., Ostermann, K.: Compiling eﬀect handlers in
capability-passing style. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4(ICFP), 93:1–93:28 (2020)
22. Sheard, T., Jones, S.L.P.: Template meta-programming for haskell. ACM SIGPLAN
Notices 37(12), 60–75 (2002)
23. Swierstra, W.: Data types ` a la carte. J. Funct. Program. 18(4), 423–436 (2008)
24. Taha, W.: Multi-Stage Programming : Its Theory and Applications. Ph.D. thesis,
Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology (1999)
25. Taha, W., Sheard, T.: Multi-stage programming with explicit annotations. In:
PEPM. pp. 203–217. ACM (1997)
26. Taha, W., Sheard, T.: MetaML and multi-stage programming with explicit annota-
tions. Theoretical Computer Science 248(1), 211–242 (2000), PEPM ’97

--- PDF page 20 ---
20 van den Berg et al.
27. Wadler, P.: The expression problem. Mailing list (1998)
28. Wei, G., Braˇ cevac, O., Tan, S., Rompf, T.: Compiling symbolic execution with
staging and algebraic eﬀects. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4(OOPSLA) (Nov 2020)
29. Wu, N., Schrijvers, T.: Fusion for free: Eﬃcient algebraic eﬀect handlers. In: MPC
2015 (2015)
30. Wu, N., Schrijvers, T., Hinze, R.: Eﬀect handlers in scope. In: Symposium on
Haskell. pp. 1–12. ACM (2014)
31. Yallop, J.: Staged generic programming. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 1(ICFP),
29:1–29:29 (2017)

--- PDF page 21 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 21
A An Eﬀect Library
This Appendix contains a library of eﬀects that can be modularly composed.
Each eﬀect can be implemented with a limited number of lines of code.
A.1 General
Trees and Their Instances The Tree datatype for representing latent eﬀects
with its corresponding instances.
data Tree (σ :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗) (l :: ∗ → ∗ ) a where
Leaf :: a → Treeσ l a
Node :: σ p c
→ l ()
→ (∀x.c x → l () → Treeσ l (l x ))
→ (l p → Treeσ l a )
→ Treeσ l a
instance Functor (Treeσ l) where
fmap = liftM
instance Applicative (Treeσ l) where
pure = return
(<∗>) = ap
instance Monad (Treeσ l) where
return = Leaf
Leaf x > >= f = f x
Node c l st k > >= f = Node c l st (λx → k x > >= f )
Datatypes ` a la CarteWe use a DTC approach to compose and project values
and signatures.
class v1<: v2 where
inj v :: v1 → v2
proj v :: v2 → Maybe v1
inﬁxr +
data (σ1 +σ2) :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Inl′ ::σ1 p c → (σ1 +σ2) p c
Inr′ ::σ2 p c → (σ1 +σ2) p c
class (σ1 :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗)<σ 2 where
injSig ::σ1 p c →σ2 p c
instanceσ<σ where
injSig = id
instanceσ1< (σ1 +σ2) where
injSig = Inl′

--- PDF page 22 ---
22 van den Berg et al.
instance (σ1<σ 3) ⇒σ1< (σ2 +σ3) where
injSig = Inr′ ◦ injSig
Other Datatypes and Helper Functions Other straightforward datatypes
such as the identity functor and Void.
data Void
newtype Id a = Id {unId :: a } deriving (Functor)
instance Applicative Id where
pure a = Id a
Id f <∗> Id x = Id (f x )
The StateL s l a type is a wrapper for the state type ( s, a), where the value
is wrapped in a latent eﬀect functor l. Similarly, EitherL left l a is a wrapper for
the Either left a type, where the right value is wrapped in a latent eﬀect functor
l.
newtype StateL s l a = StateL {unStateL :: (s, l a )}
deriving Show
instance Functor l ⇒ Functor (StateL s l ) where
fmap f (StateL (s, la)) = StateL (s, fmap f la )
newtype EitherL left l a = EitherL {unEitherL :: Either left (l a )}
Extracting the Value from the Eﬀect Tree Ending has an empty signature,
so the tree can only consist of a leave. The handler extracts the value from that
leave, possibly decorated with latent eﬀects.
data Ending :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗
hEnd :: Tree Ending l a → a
hEnd (Leaf x ) = x
Subtrees of the Treetype data NoSub :: ∗ → ∗where
data OneSub v :: ∗ → ∗where
One :: OneSub v v
noSubNode :: ∀v σ1 σ2.σ1<σ 2
⇒σ1 v NoSub → Treeσ2 Id v
noSubNode n = Node (injSig n ) (Id ()) (λx → case x of ) ( Leaf ◦ unId)
oneSubNode :: ∀v w σ1 σ2.σ1<σ 2
⇒σ1 w (OneSub v ) → Treeσ2 Id v → Treeσ2 Id w
oneSubNode n t = Node (injSig n ) (Id ()) (λOne → Id <$> t) (Leaf ◦ unId)

--- PDF page 23 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 23
A.2 Eﬀects
In this section, we present small standalone implementations of a single eﬀect,
that can be combined in a modular fashion into languages with diﬀerent eﬀect
features. These implementations come with a deﬁnition of the eﬀect, a handler
for interpreting the eﬀect, and smart constructors.
Reader The Reading eﬀect provides two operations: ask retrieves the current
environment, and local passes down an updated environment to a subtree.
data Reading r :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Local :: (r → r) → Reading r a (OneSub a )
Ask :: Reading r r NoSub
hRead :: Functor l
⇒ r
→ Tree (Reading r +σ) l (l a )
→ Treeσ l (l a )
hRead r (Leaf x ) = Leaf x
hRead r (Node (Inl′ (Local f )) l st k ) = hRead (f r ) (st One l )> >= hRead r ◦ k
hRead r (Node (Inl′ Ask) l k) = hRead r (k (r <$ l))
hRead r (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) =
Node op l (λc2 → hRead r ◦ st c 2) (hRead r ◦ k)
local :: ∀r σ a.(Reading r <σ ) ⇒ (r → r) → Treeσ Id a → Treeσ Id a
local f t = oneSubNode (Local f ) t
ask :: (Reading r <σ ) ⇒ Treeσ Id r
ask = noSubNode Ask
State The Mutating eﬀect provides the two standard operations for state: get
and put.
data Mutating v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Get :: Mutating v v NoSub
Put :: v → Mutating v () NoSub
hMut :: Functor l
⇒ s
→ Tree (Mutating s +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (StateL s l ) (StateL s Id a )
hMut s (Leaf x ) = Leaf $ StateL (s, Id x )
hMut s (Node (Inl′ Get) l k) = hMut s (k (fmap (λ → s) l))
hMut (Node (Inl′ (Put s )) l k) = hMut s (k l )
hMut s (Node (Inr′ c) l st k ) =
Node c (StateL (s, l)) (λc (StateL (s′, l′)) → transS <$> hMut s′ (st c l′))
(λ (StateL (s′, lv′)) → hMut s′ (k lv′))
transS :: StateL s Id (l a ) → StateL s l a

--- PDF page 24 ---
24 van den Berg et al.
transS (StateL (s, x)) = StateL (s, unId x )
get :: (Mutating s <σ ) ⇒ Treeσ Id s
get = noSubNode Get
put :: (Mutating s <σ ) ⇒ s → Treeσ Id ()
put s = noSubNode (Put s )
Exceptions The Throwing eﬀect provides the two well-known operations for
exceptions: throw and catch.
data Throwing x v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Throw :: x → Throwing x v Void NoSub
Catch :: Throwing x v v (MaybeSub x v )
hExc :: (Functor l )
⇒ Tree (Throwing x v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (EitherL (l (), x) l) (EitherL (l (), x) Id a )
hExc (Leaf x ) = Leaf $ EitherL $ Right $ Id x
hExc (Node (Inl′ (Throw x )) l ) = Leaf $ EitherL $ Left (l, x)
hExc (Node (Inl′ Catch) l st k ) = hExc (st NothingS l )
> >= either (λ(l′, x) → hExc (st (JustS x ) l′)
> >= either (Leaf ◦ EitherL ◦ Left) (hExc ◦ k ◦ unId))
(hExc ◦ k ◦ unId)
hExc (Node (Inr′ c) l st k ) =
Node c (EitherL $ Right l )
(λz → either (Leaf ◦ EitherL ◦ Left)
(λlv → transE <$> hExc (st z lv )))
(either (Leaf ◦ EitherL ◦ Left) (hExc ◦ k))
throw :: ∀x v σ.(Throwing x v <σ ) ⇒ x → Treeσ Id v
throw e = Node (injSig (Throw e :: Throwing x v Void NoSub ))
(Id ())
(λx → case x of )
(λx → case x of )
catch :: ∀x v σ.(Throwing x v <σ )
⇒ Treeσ Id v → (x → Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
catch p h = Node (injSig (Catch :: Throwing x v v (MaybeSub x v )))
(Id ())
(λz → case z of
JustS x → Id <$> (h x )
NothingS → Id <$> p)
(Leaf ◦ unId)
Errors The Failing eﬀect has a single operation err for constructing an error.
data Failing v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Err :: v → Failing v Void NoSub

--- PDF page 25 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 25
hErr :: Functor l
⇒ Tree (Failing v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (EitherL v l ) (EitherL v Id a )
hErr (Leaf x ) = Leaf $ EitherL $ Right $ Id x
hErr (Node (Inl′ (Err x )) ) = Leaf $ EitherL $ Left x
hErr (Node (Inr′ c) l st k ) =
Node c (EitherL $ Right l )
(λz → either (Leaf ◦ EitherL ◦ Left) (λlv → transE <$> hErr (st z lv )))
(either (Leaf ◦ EitherL ◦ Left) ( hErr ◦ k))
either :: (v → c) → (l a → c) → EitherL v l a → c
either f (EitherL (Left x )) = f x
either g (EitherL (Right y )) = g y
transE :: EitherL v Id (l a ) → EitherL v l a
transE (EitherL (Left x )) = EitherL $ Left x
transE (EitherL (Right y )) = EitherL $ Right $ unId y
err :: (Failing v <σ ) ⇒ v → Treeσ Id a
err x = Node (injSig (Err x )) (Id ()) (λx → case x of ) (λx → case x of )
Arithmetics The Adding eﬀect provides operations for adding natural numbers:
plus and nat.
data Adding v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Nat :: Integer → Adding v v NoSub
Plus :: v → v → Adding v v NoSub
hPlus :: (Functor l, Integer<: v)
⇒ Tree (Adding v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ l a
hPlus (Leaf x ) = Leaf x
hPlus (Node (Inl′ (Nat n )) l k) = hPlus (k (const (inj v n)<$> l))
hPlus (Node (Inl′ (Plus v 1 v2)) l k) = case (proj v v1, proj v v2) of
(Just n1, Just n2 ) → hPlus (k (const (inj v (n1 + n2))<$> l))
hPlus (Node (Inr′ c) l st k ) =
Node c l (λs → hPlus ◦ st s ) (hPlus ◦ k)
plus :: (Adding v <σ ) ⇒ v → v → Treeσ Id v
plus n1 n2 = noSubNode (Plus n1 n2 )
nat :: (Adding v <σ ) ⇒ Integer → Treeσ Id v
nat n = noSubNode (Nat n )
Print The Printing eﬀect has a single operation for printing a string: print.
data Printing v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Print :: String → Printing v v NoSub

--- PDF page 26 ---
26 van den Berg et al.
hPrint :: (Functor l, String<: v)
⇒ Tree (Printing v +σ) l a → Treeσ l a
hPrint (Leaf x ) = Leaf x
hPrint (Node (Inl′ (Print s )) l k) = hPrint (k (const (inj v s)<$> l))
hPrint (Node (Inr′ c) l st k ) = Node c l (λs → hPrint ◦ st s ) (hPrint ◦ k)
print :: (Printing v <σ ) ⇒ String → Treeσ Id v
print s = noSubNode (Print s )
Delay Evaluation The Suspending eﬀect provides two operations: suspend
delays the evaluation of a recursive subtree, and enact forces the evaluation of
the delayed subtree without memoizing the result .
data Suspending v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Suspend :: Suspending v Ptr (OneSub v )
Enact :: Ptr → Suspending v v NoSub
type Ptr = Int
type Suspensionσ l v = l () → Tree (Suspending v +σ) l (l v )
data Suspended r = Suspended Ptr r deriving (Functor)
hSuspend :: Functor l
⇒ [Suspensionσ l v ]
→ Tree (Suspending v +σ) l (l a )
→ Treeσ (StateL [Suspensionσ l v ] l) (StateL [Suspensionσ l v ] l a )
hSuspend rs (Leaf x ) = Leaf (StateL (rs, x))
hSuspend rs (Node (Inl′ Suspend) l st k ) =
hSuspend (rs + + [st One ]) (k (length rs <$ l))
hSuspend rs (Node (Inl′ (Enact p )) l k) = do
StateL (rs′, lv) ← hSuspend rs ((rs !! p) l); hSuspend rs′ (k lv )
hSuspend rs (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) =
Node op (StateL (rs, l)) (λc2 (StateL (rs′, l′)) → hSuspend rs′ (st c 2 l′))
(λ (StateL (rs′, lv′)) → hSuspend rs′ (k lv′))
suspend :: ∀v σ.(Suspending v <σ ) ⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id Ptr
suspend t = oneSubNode (Suspend) t
enact :: (Suspending v <σ ) ⇒ Ptr → Treeσ Id v
enact p = noSubNode (Enact p )
Memoization The Thunking eﬀect is analogous to Suspending, but its handler
memoizes the result of forcing a thunked computation.
data Thunking v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Thunk :: Thunking v Ptr (OneSub v )
Force :: Ptr → Thunking v v NoSub
type Ptr = Int

--- PDF page 27 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 27
type Thunk σ l v = Either (l () → Tree (Thunking v +σ) l (l v )) v
data TreeWith f σ (l :: ∗ → ∗ ) a =
TreeWith {unTreeWith:: Treeσ (f l ) (f l a )}
data Thunked r = Thunked Ptr r
class Modular (m1 :: ∗ → ∗ ) (m2 :: (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗ → ∗ ) where
fwd :: m1 (m2 m1 a) → m2 m1 a
replace :: Int → a → [a ] → [a ]
replace 0 x ( : xs) = x : xs
replace i x (y : xs) | i> 0 = y : replace (i − 1) x xs
replace = error "bad index"
For this eﬀect, we can provide two handlers, one for lazy evaluation and
another one for eager evaluation.
hThunk :: (Functor l, Modular l (TreeWith (StateL ([Thunk σ l v ]))σ))
⇒ [Thunk σ l v ]
→ Tree (Thunking v +σ) l (l a )
→ Treeσ (StateL [Thunk σ l v ] l) (StateL [Thunk σ l v ] l a )
hThunk rs (Leaf x ) = Leaf (StateL (rs, x))
hThunk rs (Node (Inl′ Thunk) l st k ) =
hThunk (rs + + [Left (st One )]) (k (length rs <$ l))
hThunk rs (Node (Inl′ (Force p)) l k) = case (rs !! p) of
Left t → do
StateL (rs′, lv) ← hThunk rs (t l )
unTreeWith$ fwd $
(λv → TreeWith$ hThunk (replace p (Right v ) rs′) (k lv ))<$> lv
Right v → hThunk rs (k (v <$ l))
hThunk rs (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) =
Node op (StateL (rs, l)) (λc2 (StateL (rs′, l′)) → hThunk rs′ (st c 2 l′))
(λ (StateL (rs′, lv′)) → hThunk rs′ (k lv′))
hEager :: (Functor l, Modular l (TreeWith (StateL [v ])σ))
⇒ [v ]
→ Tree (Thunking v +σ) l (l a )
→ Treeσ (StateL [v ] l) (StateL [v ] l a )
hEager vs (Leaf x ) = Leaf (StateL (vs, x))
hEager vs (Node (Inl′ Thunk) l st k ) = do
StateL (vs′, lv) ← hEager vs (st One l )
unTreeWith$ fwd $
(λv → TreeWith$ hEager (vs′ + + [v ]) (k (length vs′ <$ l)))<$> lv
hEager vs (Node (Inl′ (Force p)) l k) = do
hEager vs (k ((vs !! p)<$ l))
hEager vs (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) =
Node op (StateL (vs, l)) (λc2 (StateL (vs′, l′)) → hEager vs′ (st c 2 l′))
(λ (StateL (vs′, lv′)) → hEager vs′ (k lv′))

--- PDF page 28 ---
28 van den Berg et al.
thunk :: ∀v σ.(Thunking v <σ ) ⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id Ptr
thunk t = oneSubNode Thunk t
force :: (Thunking v <σ ) ⇒ Ptr → Treeσ Id v
force p = noSubNode (Force p)
Function Abstraction The Abstracting eﬀect has three operators: var for
representing a variable, abs for function abstraction, and app for function appli-
cation.
data Abstracting v :: ∗ → (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗where
Var :: Int → Abstracting v v NoSub
App :: v → v → Abstracting v v NoSub
Abs :: Abstracting v v (OneSub v )
data Closure r where
Clos :: Ptr → Env r → Closure r
type Env v = [v ]
type Ptr = Int
For this eﬀect, we can deﬁne two handlers: one for call site handling of eﬀects an
another for deﬁnition site handling of eﬀects
type StoreCS σ l v = [RCS σ l v ]
type RCS σ l v = l () → Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l (l v )
type StoreDS σ l v = [RDS σ l v ]
type RDS σ l v = Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l (l v )
hAbsCS :: (Closure v <: v, Functor l )
⇒ [v ]
→ StoreCS σ l v
→ Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (StateL (StoreCS σ l v ) l) (StoreCS σ l v, a)
hAbsCS r (Leaf x ) = Leaf (r, x)
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl′ Abs) l st k ) = do
let v = inj v (Clos (length r ) nv)
let r′ = r + + [st One ]
hAbsCS nv r′ (k (v <$ l))
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl′ (App v 1 v2)) l k) = case proj v v1 of
Just (Clos fp nv′) → do
(r′, v) ← hAbsCS (v2 : nv′) r ((r !! fp) l)
hAbsCS nv r′ (k v )
Nothing → error "application error"
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inl′ (Var n)) l k) = hAbsCS nv r (k ((nv !! n)<$ l))
hAbsCS nv r (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) = Node op (StateL (r, l))
(λc (StateL (r′, l )) → StateL<$> hAbsCS nv r′ (st c l ))

--- PDF page 29 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 29
(λ (StateL (r′, lv )) → hAbsCS nv r′ (k lv ))
hAbsDS :: (Closure v <: v, Functor l )
⇒ [v ]
→ StoreDS σ l v
→ Tree (Abstracting v +σ) l a
→ Treeσ (StateL (StoreDS σ l v ) l)
(StoreDS σ l v, a)
hAbsDS r (Leaf x ) = Leaf (r, x)
hAbsDS nv r (Node (Inl′ Abs) l st k ) = do
let v = inj v (Clos (length r ) nv)
let r′ = r + + [st One l ]
hAbsDS nv r′ (k (v <$ l))
hAbsDS nv r (Node (Inl′ (App v 1 v2)) k) =
case proj v v1 of
Just (Clos fp nv′) → do
(r′, v) ← hAbsDS (v2 : nv′) r (r !! fp)
hAbsDS nv r′ (k v )
Nothing → error "application error"
hAbsDS nv r (Node (Inl′ (Var n)) l k) =
hAbsDS nv r (k (nv !! n <$ l))
hAbsDS nv r (Node (Inr′ op) l st k ) =
Node op (StateL (r, l))
(λc (StateL (r′, l)) →
StateL<$> hAbsDS nv r′ (st c l ))
(λ(StateL (r′, lv)) → hAbsDS nv r′ (k lv ))
var :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ Int → Treeσ Id v
var n = noSubNode (Var n)
app :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ v → v → Treeσ Id v
app v 1 v2 = noSubNode (App v 1 v2)
abs :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
abs t = oneSubNode Abs t
A.3 Language Features
This section introduces language features that can be used as individual compo-
nents to modularly construct languages. We provide a syntax for these features,
as well as a mapping to latent eﬀects, by means of an algebra.
Arithmetics We make a simple arithmetic language with numbers and addition.
data Arith n = Num Int | Add n n
arithAlg :: (Adding v <σ ) ⇒ Arith v → Treeσ Id v

--- PDF page 30 ---
30 van den Berg et al.
arithAlg (Num n ) = nat (toInteger n )
arithAlg (Add x y ) = plus x y
Lambda calculus The lambda calculus has constructs for variables, abstraction
and application.
data LamExpr e = VarExpr Int | AbsExpr e | AppExpr e e
We can deﬁne diﬀerent algebras, depending on the evaluation strategy:
lamAlg :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ LamExpr (Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
lamAlg (VarExpr n) = var n
lamAlg (AbsExpr e ) = abs e
lamAlg (AppExpr e 1 e2) = do
v1 ← e1
v2 ← e2
app v 1 v2
Call-by-need evaluation can be expressed through the following algebra, where
abs, app and var are deﬁned in Section B.2.
lazyAlg :: (Reading [v ]<σ, Thunking v <σ, Suspending v <σ,
Thunked [v ]<: v, Closure v <: v)
⇒ LamExpr (Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
lazyAlg (VarExpr n) = var lazy n
lazyAlg (AbsExpr e ) = abs lazy e
lazyAlg (AppExpr e 1 e2) = applazy e1 e2
Call-by-name evaluation is similar, but without memoizing (intermediate)
results.
cbnAlg :: (Reading [v ]<σ, Suspending v <σ,
Suspended [v ]<: v, Closure v <: v)
⇒ LamExpr (Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
cbnAlg (VarExpr n) = var cbn n
cbnAlg (AbsExpr e ) = abs cbn e
cbnAlg (AppExpr e 1 e2) = appcbn e1 e2
Staging For the staging expressions, we refer to Section C for the implementa-
tions of splice, quote, shift and unquote.
data StageExpr s = Splice s | Quote s | Unquote s | Shift Int s
stageAlg :: ∀v σ r1 r2.
(Suspending v <σ, Reading r1<σ, Reading r2<σ,
Reading (Env s v)<σ, Suspended r1<: v,

--- PDF page 31 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 31
Suspended r2<: v, Suspended (Env s v)<: v)
⇒ StageExpr (Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
stageAlg (Splice s) = splice s
stageAlg (Quote s ) = quote@r1 s
stageAlg (Unquote s ) = unquote@r2 s
stageAlg (Shift n s ) = shift n s
Other We can deﬁne other simple language features such as printing and let-
expressions.
data PrintExpr e = Pr String
printAlg :: (Printing v <σ ) ⇒ PrintExpr v → Treeσ Id v
printAlg (Pr s ) = print s
data LetExpr e = Let e e | Seq e e | LetVar Int
letAlg :: (Abstracting v <σ ) ⇒ LetExpr (Treeσ Id v ) → Treeσ Id v
letAlg (Let e1 e2) = do
v1 ← abs e 1
v2 ← e2
app v 1 v2
letAlg (Seq e1 e2) = do e1; e2
letAlg (LetVar n) = var n
B Modular Carriers for Call-by-Need Lambdas
This Appendix shows how we can use an adapted form of the modular carriers
of Schrijvers et al. [20] to deﬁne call-by-need and call-by-value evaluation for
function abstractions. We give semantics to call-by-need lambdas using three
diﬀerent eﬀects: Reading, Suspending and Thunking. For the deﬁnition and the
handlers of these eﬀects, we refer to Appendix A.
B.1 Modular Carriers
The hThunk handler uses a technique that lets us access values wrapped in
a latent eﬀect functor: we use a forwarding algebra, inspired by the work of
Schrijvers et al. [20]. They propose a modular approach to composing algebraic
eﬀects so that each handler only has to know about the part of the syntax its
eﬀect is handling. This is achieved through the deﬁnition of a modular carrier
Modular that features a forwarding algebra fwd.
class Modular (m1 :: ∗ → ∗ ) (m2 :: (∗ → ∗ ) → ∗ → ∗ ) where
fwd :: m1 (m2 m1 a) → m2 m1 a

--- PDF page 32 ---
32 van den Berg et al.
However, we use this modular carrier in a diﬀerent context in the sense that
it is now modular with respect to its subcomputations, for which the syntax
and structure is known. On the contrary, the original deﬁnition is modular with
respect to the outer computation.
B.2 Call-by-Need Evaluation
The three operations for call-by-need evaluation are deﬁned below.
abs lazy :: ∀v σ.(Reading [v ]<σ, Suspending v <σ, Closure v <: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
abs lazy body = do
nv ← ask
p ← suspend body
return (inj v (Clos p (nv :: [v ])))
var lazy :: ∀v σ.(Reading [v ]<σ, Thunking v <σ, Thunked [v ]<: v)
⇒ Int → Treeσ Id v
var lazy x = do
nv ← ask
let v = (nv :: [v ]) !! x
case proj v v of
Just (Thunked p nv′) → local (const (nv′ :: [v ])) (force p)
Nothing → return v
applazy :: ∀v σ.(Suspending v <σ, Thunking v <σ, Reading [v ]<σ,
Closure v <: v, Thunked [v ]<: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
applazy e1 e2 = do
vf ← e1; nv ← ask; p ← thunk e 2
let th :: v = inj v $ Thunked p (nv :: [v ])
case proj v vf of
Just (Clos p′ nv′) → do
local (const (th : (nv′ :: [v ]))) (enact p′)
B.3 Call-by-Name
The three operations for call-by-name evaluation are similar to those for call-by-
need, but without memoizing the result.
abs cbn :: ∀v σ.(Reading [v ]<σ, Suspending v <σ, Closure v <: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
abs cbn body = do
nv ← ask

--- PDF page 33 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 33
p ← suspend body
return (inj v (Clos p (nv :: [v ])))
var cbn :: ∀v σ.(Reading [v ]<σ, Suspending v <σ, Suspended [v ]<: v)
⇒ Int → Treeσ Id v
var cbn x = do
nv ← ask
let v = (nv :: [v ]) !! x
case proj v v of
Just (Suspended p nv′) → local (const (nv′ :: [v ])) (enact p )
Nothing → return v
appcbn :: ∀v σ.(Suspending v <σ, Reading [v ]<σ,
Closure v <: v, Suspended [v ]<: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
appcbn e1 e2 = do
vf ← e1; nv ← ask; p ← suspend e 2
let th :: v = inj v $ Suspended p (nv :: [v ])
case proj v vf of
Just (Clos p′ nv′) → do
local (const (th : (nv′ :: [v ]))) (enact p′)
C A Latent Eﬀect Semantics of Staging
In this appendix we show how to model three staging operations, inspired by
MetaML [26]: quote for staging a piece of code; unquote for unstaging; and push
for deﬁning code with one or more variables whose bindings only become known
when the code is unquoted. First, we deﬁne a small library of latent eﬀects to
work with.
C.1 Reading, Suspending, and Revisiting Lambdas
Appendix A deﬁnes the two necessary eﬀect interfaces: Reading and Suspending.
Furthermore, the following Bindable type class has operations for binding a value
in an environment, and looking up a value in an environment.
class Bindable r v where
bindVal :: v → r → r
lookupVal :: r → Int → v
For plain, de Bruijn indexed environments, these functions are straightforwardly
deﬁned:

--- PDF page 34 ---
34 van den Berg et al.
instance Bindable [v ] v where
bindVal = (:)
lookupVal = (!!)
The challenge with code splicing is to allow spliced code to reference variables
from the context that code is being spliced with. We address this challenge by
using a reﬁned type of environment and Bindable.
C.2 Quote and Unquote
The quote operation is deﬁned in Suspending and Reading. It thunks a subcom-
putation, remembering the environment that the code is supposed to be evaluated
under, reusing the Suspended value from Section ?? as the representation of a
quoted piece of code:
quote :: ∀r v l σ.(Reading r <σ, Suspending v <σ, Suspended r <: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
quote m = do
p ← suspend m
nv ← ask
return (inj v $ Suspended p (nv :: r))
The unquote operation forces a quoted (thunked) computation.
unquote :: ∀r v l σ.(Reading r <σ, Suspending v <σ, Suspended r <: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
unquote m = do
v ← m
case proj v v of
Just (Suspended p nv ) → local (const (nv :: r)) (enact p )
Nothing → error "bad unquote"
C.3 Pushing and Splicing
We will introduce an operation for deﬁning code with variables whose bindings are
not yet known. This operation relies on the following type of staged environment:
newtype Env s v = Env s {unEnv s :: [Maybe (Either v Int )] }
The Maybe type is used to distinguish positions in the environment whose bindings
are not yet known. An unknown binding is represented as Nothing. A known
binding is Either an actual value v, or an integer representing a forward reference
to a value that occurs n positions further down the environment. We use forward
references because our staged environments behave in a way that is reminiscent
of a telescope [2]: for a bound value v occurring in a staged environment such
as Env s (Just (Left v) : nv), the value v is closed under the substitutions in the

--- PDF page 35 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 35
environment nv, since nv contains “contextual” bindings that potential unknown
bindings in v must be instantiated with.
The implementation of the Bindable interface below illustrates how this
“closing” of values of type Val works:
data Val = CloV (Closure (Env s Val))
| CodV (Suspended (Env s Val))
| IntV Int
instance Bindable (Env s Val) Val where
bindVal v (Env s nv) = Env s $ Just
(Right (length nv )) : nv + + [Just (Left v )]
lookupVal (Env s nv) x = go nv x
where go (Nothing : nv) 0 = error "quote error"
go (Just (Right y ) : nv) 0 = lookupVal (Env s nv) y
go (Just (Left v ) : nv) 0 = cover v (Env s nv)
go ( : nv) x | x ⩾ 0 = lookupVal (Env s nv) (x − 1)
go nv x = error "bad index"
The bindVal function prepends an environment by a forward reference to a value
that is appended to the back of the environment. The lookupVal function follows
forward references, and when it ﬁnds a value, it uses the cover function to “close”
a value over the bindings in the tail of the environment (i.e., the bindings from
the context of the bound value):
cover :: Val → Env s Val → Val
cover (CloV (Clos p nv′)) nv = CloV (Clos p (combine nv′ nv))
cover (CodV (Suspended p nv′)) nv = CodV (Suspended p (combine nv′ nv))
cover (IntV i ) nv = IntV i
The combine function used by this cover function instantiates unknown bindings
by bindings coming from the context:
combine :: Env s v → Env s v → Env s v
combine (Env s nv 1) (Env s nv 2) = Env s (go nv 1 nv 2)
where
go [ ] nv = nv
go (Nothing : nv 1) [ ] = Nothing : nv 1
go (Nothing : nv 1) (Nothing : nv 2) = Nothing : go nv 1 nv 2
go (Nothing : nv 1) (Just (Left v ) : nv 2) = Just (Left v ) : go nv 1 nv 2
go (Nothing : nv 1) (Just (Right n ) : nv 2) = Just (Right (n + length nv 1))
: go nv 1 nv 2
go (Just v : nv 1) nv 2 = Just v : go nv 1 nv 2
The push operation introduces unknown bindings in the context of a subcompu-
tation.

--- PDF page 36 ---
36 van den Berg et al.
push :: ∀v σ.(Reading (Env s v)<σ )
⇒ Int → Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
push n m = local (λ(Env s nv :: Env s v) →
Env s $ replicate n Nothing + +nv)
m
Finally, the splice operation is like unquote, but it combines the environment
in a Suspended value with the contextual environment of the splice operation,
thereby instantiating variables whose bindings were unknown when the thunk
was created.
splice :: ∀r v l σ.(Reading (Env s v)<σ, Suspending v <σ,
Suspended (Env s v)<: v)
⇒ Treeσ Id v → Treeσ Id v
splice m = do
v ← m
case proj v v of
Just (Suspended p nv ) → local (combine (nv :: Env s v)) (enact p )
Nothing → error "bad unquote"
C.4 The Diﬀerence between splice and push
While it is straightforward to deﬁne latent eﬀect handlers thatdelay the evaluation
of subtrees (which is exactly whatSuspending and Thunking do), it is problematic
to deﬁne handlers that “hoist” code that occurs in the computational subtree
or the continuation of a tree. The crux of the problem is that subtrees and
continuations require a value and a latent eﬀect context before we can inspect
their Trees. Escape expressions in MetaML represent code that must be run before
returning a code value, and if escape expressions were to occur in computational
subtrees of a quote operation, we would have to hoist the code out of the subtree.
Our push and splice operations work around this problem. They allow us to write
splicing code so that the eﬀectful operations that compute code to be spliced
occur in the “right” place in the latent eﬀect tree.
The program in Figre 6 justiﬁes the need for the two diﬀerent constructs to
mimic escape operations.
The program in Figure 4 of Section 4.1 only uses the splice construct. In
order to write programs that behave similarly to MetaML programs with escape
expressions that occur under a binder inside staged code, we also need push. In
Figure 6, the MetaML program on the left (due to Taha [24]) contains two escape
expressions that both occur under function binders inside staged code. The result
of running the program is a value that is alpha-equivalent to the code value
<fn x1 => ( fn x2 => x2 + x1)> . The program on the right in Figure 6 uses
push to indicate how many quoted binders a given computation is scoped by. 6
6 We have also added variable names in {-comments -} in Figure 6 to increase the
readability of the de Bruijn indexed program.

--- PDF page 37 ---
Latent Eﬀects for Reusable Language Components 37
1 let T = fn e = >
2 < fn x = > x + ~e >
3 in < fn x = > ~( T <x >) >
letbind {-T -} (abs ′ {-e -}
(letbind {-d -}
(push {-x -} 1 (var {-e -} 1))
(quote (abs ′ {-x -}
(add (var {-x -} 0) (splice (var {-d -} 1)))))))
(letbind {-d’ -} (push {-x -} 1
(app (var {-T -} 1) (quote (var {-x -} 0))))
(quote (abs ′ {-x -} (splice (var {-d’ -} 1)))))
Fig. 6: A MetaML program and its counterpart with quote, unquote, push, and
splice.
The push on line 3 on the right in Figure 6 corresponds to the escape expression
in line 2 on the left. Likewise, the push on line 6 on the right corresponds to the
escape expression in line 3 on the left. The dynamic semantics of push creates
an environment with “holes” that represent unknown bindings. The dynamic
semantics of splice automatically ﬁlls in the holes of environments in pushed
code values, with bindings from the dynamic context of the splice expression.
This pushing and ﬁlling of holes makes the splicing in the program on the right
behave similar to the (lexically-scoped) escape expressions in the program on
the left. This is to yield a code value similar to the code value returned by the
MetaML program.