--- PDF page 1 ---
73
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion
ZHIXUAN YANG, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
NICOLAS WU, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
Effect handlers can be composed by applying them sequentially, each handling some operations and leaving
other operations uninterpreted in the syntax tree. However, the semantics of composed handlers can be
subtle—it is well known that different orders of composing handlers can lead to drastically different semantics.
Determining the correct order of composition is a non-trivial task.
To alleviate this problem, this paper presents a systematic way of deriving sufficient conditions on handlers
for their composite to correctly handle combinations, such as the sum and the tensor, of the effect theories
separately handled. These conditions are solely characterised by the clauses for relevant operations of the
handlers, and are derived by fusing two handlers into one using a form of fold/build fusion and continuation-
passing style transformation.
As case studies, the technique is applied to commutative and distributive interaction of handlers to obtain
a series of results about the interaction of common handlers: (a) equations respected by each handler are
preserved after handler composition; (b) handling mutable state before any handler gives rise to a semantics in
which state operations are commutative with any operations from the latter handler; (c) handling the writer
effect and mutable state in either order gives rise to a correct handler of the commutative combination of
these two theories.
CCS Concepts: •Theory of computation → Program reasoning; Control primitives.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Haskell, fusion, modular handlers, CPS transformation
ACM Reference Format:
Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu. 2021. Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion. Proc. ACM Program. Lang.
5, ICFP, Article 73 (August 2021), 48 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3473578
1 INTRODUCTION
Algebraic effects [Plotkin and Power 2002] and their handlers [Plotkin and Pretnar 2009, 2013] are
inherently a modular approach to modelling computational effects: algebraic theories of effects
specify effects and handlers implement them. Furthermore, both algebraic theories and handlers are
composable in their own right. Algebraic theories can be combined in various ways of specifying
the interaction of operations of the sub-theories [Hyland et al. 2006], such as requiring operations
from one sub-theory to be commutative with any operation from other theories, giving rise to the
combined theory called the tensor of the sub-theories. The modularity of effect theories enables
programmers to reason about programs involving complex computational effects in a modular
way [Gibbons and Hinze 2011]. On the implementation side, effect handlers are composable by
running them sequentially, each handling a set of operations in the computation and forwarding
other operations.
Authors’ addresses: Zhixuan Yang, s.yang20@imperial.ac.uk, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United
Kingdom; Nicolas Wu, n.wu@imperial.ac.uk, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2475-1421/2021/8-ART73
https://doi.org/10.1145/3473578
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 2 ---
73:2 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
However, the link between the composability on the specification side (effect theories) and the
composability on the implementation side (handlers) has remained elusive. Suppose that two effect
theories are combined into a bigger theory by specifying a particular way for their operations
to interact. Following the modular methodology of algebraic effects, we would like to handle the
combined theory by composing handlers of the sub-theories. However, it is not the case that the
sequential composition of any handlers of the sub-theories automatically respects the specified
interaction. Instead, additional work must be done to prove that the composite handler indeed
validates the combined theory. Our goal is to minimise this additional work.
To illustrate this problem, we use a running example of the theories of mutable state and
nondeterminism. The theory State of mutable state consists of two operations get and put for
reading and writing the state, and equations that characterise the properties these two operations
obey (listed in full in Example 2.4), such as that the result of a read immediately following a write
must be the value just written. The theory NDet of nondeterministic choice has one operation coin
that returns a Boolean value and certain equations specifying coin (Example 2.5).
These two theories can be separately handled by two handlershST and hND respectively (Figure 1
shows an implementation of them in Eff [Bauer and Pretnar 2015]). The semantics of any handler
h is a function handle h that applies the handler on computations, i.e. terms built from effectful
operations and pure values, producing terms with unhandled operations. Handlers of State and
NDet can be sequentially composed to handle both stateful and nondeterministic operations in a
computation M, in the order that either mutable state gets handled first
handle hND (handle hST M) ( HStNd )
or nondeterminism gets handled first
handle hST (handle hND M) ( HNdSt )
and it is well known that the two orders result in different handling behaviours. On the specification
side, the theories State and NDet can be composed into one single theory too. One desirable
combination is the commutative tensor [Hyland et al. 2006], or simply tensor, of the theories State
and NDet—the theory with all the operations and equations from State and NDet and additionally
equations stating that any operation from State is commutative with any operation from NDet:
do {b ← coin (); put s; k b } = do {put s; b ← coin (); k b } (1)
do {b ← coin (); s ← get (); k b s } = do {s ← get (); b ← coin (); k b s } (2)
Although both handlers and theories are composable, the problem is that the composabilities of
handlers and theories are not automatically connected. Supposing that the tensor is the desired
semantics of combining state and nondeterminism in an application, the programmer needs to
pick one from HNdSt and HStNd and prove that it indeed validates all the equations of the tensor.
Furthermore, to make the equations useful in reasoning or optimisation, one usually wants to
prove that they are term congruences under the composite handler—the equation can be applied to
transform terms in any context under the handler [Kiselyov et al. 2021].
The conventional way to show a composite handler respecting some combination of effect
theories is equational reasoning with the induction principle on computations [Plotkin and Pretnar
2008]. For example, if one wants to show that the composite handler HStNd validates equation (1)
of the tensor, one needs to do an induction on the computation k b, where 𝑘 is a free variable in
the equation. The base case for k b is a pure computation returning some value, and the inductive
case is k b = do {a ← op p; k′ a }, where some operation op is invoked and then it acts as some
computation k′. In either case, the proof obligation is to show that applying the handler HStNd
to the both sides of (1) gives rise to equivalent computations, which can be established by careful
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 3 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:3
hST = handler {
val x ↦→ val (fun s ↦→ val (x, s)),
get () k ↦→ val (fun s ↦→ k s s ),
put s ′ k ↦→ val (fun s ↦→ k () s′) }
hND = handler {
val x ↦→ val [x ],
coin () k ↦→{ let l1 = k True in
let l2 = k False in
val (l1 + +l2) } }
Fig. 1. Handlers of mutable state and nondeterminism in the language Eff [Bauer and Pretnar 2015]
calculation. Additionally, if one wants to show that the equation is a term congruence, an additional
induction on the context where the equation is used is required. In practice, proving a composite
handler respecting some combination of theories in this way can be laborious for several reasons:
• Equations proved to be respected by sub-handlers needs to be re-established for composite
handlers because in general, the composite handler does not necessarily respect the equations
respected by the sub-handlers (shown later in Example 3.4).
• One needs to explicitly prove that equations respected by a composite handler are term congru-
ences under the handler since it is not true in general [Kiselyov et al. 2021].
• Some ways of combining effect theories create a large number of equations of the same form,
but the common structure in these equations are not exploited.
1.1 A Taste of the Results
The aim of this paper is to develop techniques for proving the correctness of composite handlers
(by correctness of handlers, we always mean validating the expected equations) with respect to
combinations of effect theories in a more manageable way. For a class of handlers that are modular,
as characterised by Schrijvers et al. [2019], given any combination of effect theories, we present
a systematic way to devise conditions on handlers so that their composite correctly handles this
combination of sub-theories. We argue that verifying these conditions is much easier than proving
the correctness directly based on the definitions.
To provide a taste of the techniques developed in the paper, consider the running example in
Figure 1. Suppose the programmer has proved that the handlers hST and hND are correct handlers
for effect theories State and NDet respectively, and that the programmer wants to show that the
composite handler HStNd correctly handles the commutative tensor of State and NDet.
According to the definition, the commutative tensor of State and NDet inherits all the equations
in the two sub-theories, so the programmer first needs to show that the composite handler HStNd
respects these equations. Our results can prove this almost for free: Theorem 5.5 tells us that any
equations respected by modular handlers separately are still respected by their composite, and
indeed both hST and hND are modular handlers. Thus without any further work, we immediately
know that HStNd respects the equations fromState and NDet because these equations are respected
by hST and hND separately.
Also, the programmer needs to show that HStNd validates the commutativity equations (1, 2)
in the tensor. The conventional way to show this is to do an induction on the free computation k,
apply HStNd to both sides of the equations, and then perform equational reasoning to establish the
required equality. Although proving the correctness of composite handlers in this way is typically
not difficult, the calculation can be tedious. This paper offers a more efficient way to do this: letcput,
cget and ccoin be the clauses (in a sense made clear in Section 5.3) of the two handlers hST and hND:
cput p1 k = 𝜆s → k () p1 cget () k = 𝜆s → k s s
ccoin () k = do {l1 ← k True; l2 ← k False; return (l1 + +l2) }
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 4 ---
73:4 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Effect Combinations Results Examples
Sum Theorem 5.5 All composites of modular handlers
Commutative tensor Theorem 6.1 State and nondeterminism (Section 6.1)
State and writer (Section 6.2)
Distributive tensor Theorem 7.1 Probabilistic and nondeterministic
choices (Section 7.1)
Application-specific interactions Remark 5.3 Put-or law (Remark 6.2)
Fig. 2. Results for various combinations of effect theories and applications
Then Theorem 6.1 says that the composite handler HStNd respects the required equations (1, 2)
if each clause cST ∈ { cput, cget } of hST and each clause cND ∈ { ccoin} of hND satisfy the following
equation for all p1, p2, k (the types of the variables in the equation can be ignored for now):
cST p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → cND p2 (𝜆a2 → k a1 a2 s q))
= 𝜆s q → cND p2 (𝜆a2 → cST p1 (𝜆a1 → k a1 a2) s q) (3)
Then it is straightforward calculation to check that condition (3) is satisfied for eachcST ∈ { cput, cget }
and cND = ccoin. For example, if cST = cput, then
cput p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → ccoin p2 (𝜆a2 → k a1 a2 s q)) { definition of cput }
= 𝜆s → ( 𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → ccoin p2 (𝜆a2 → k a1 a2 s q)) () p1
= 𝜆s q → ccoin p2 (𝜆a2 → k () a2 p1 q) { definition of cput }
= 𝜆s q → ccoin p2 (𝜆a2 → cput p1 (𝜆a1 → k a1 a2) s q)
Finally, every equation respected by the composite of two modular handlers is automatically a
term congruence under the handler (Remark 5.2), which is an important property for reasoning
about effectful programs with these equations. This example will be studied in detail in Section 6.1,
and the point is that this is much less of a burden than proving directly from the definitions.
The key technique underlying the results described above is handler fusion [Wu and Schrijvers
2015]: given any two modular handlers h1 and h2, we show that there exists a modular handler
h2 ⋄ h1 such that
handle h2 ·handle h1 = handle (h2 ⋄ h1)
Consequently, the composite handler handle h2 ·handle h1 respects an effect theory if and only
if handle (h2 ⋄ h1) does, and the latter is easier to work with since it is a single catamorphism on
syntax trees of programs. By the properties of catamorphisms, handle (h2 ⋄ h1) respects an effect
theory if h2 ⋄ h1 respects it, from which we calculate conditions for handle h2 ·handle h1 to respect
various combinations of effect theories, such as Theorem 5.5 and Theorem 6.1 used in the above
example, and more results are listed in Figure 2.
1.2 Contributions
After fixing notation for preliminary concepts (Section 2), Schrijvers et al. [2019]’s modular handlers
are motivated and recalled (Section 3), and then this paper makes the following contributions:
• a characterisation of correct syntax tree transformations and correct modular handlers with a
soundness theorem relating them (Section 4);
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 5 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:5
class Functor f where
fmap :: (a → b) → f a → f b
class Monad m where
return :: a → m a
(> >=) :: m a → ( a → m b) → m b
Fig. 3. Type classes for functors and monads in Haskell
• a fusion combinator (⋄) of modular handlers (Section 5) that enables us to reason about the inter-
action of two handlers when composing them (Corollary 5.4). Particularly, we show that equations
separately respected by modular handlers are preserved after composition (Theorem 5.5);
• conditions on handlers for their composite to correctly handle the tensor of the theories (Section 6).
As applications, we show that (i) handling mutable state before any handler gives rise to a
semantics in which stateful operations are commutative with any operation from the latter
handler (Theorem 6.5), and that (ii) handling the writer effect and mutable state in either order
gives rise to a correct handler of the commutative interaction of the two theories (Theorem 6.6);
• conditions on handlers for their composite to correctly handle the distributive tensor of the
theories (Section 7), and an application to the handlers of nondeterministic and probabilistic
choice (Section 7.1), which exhibits a limitation of the fusion approach.
Finally, we discuss related work (Section 8) and conclude (Section 9).
2 PRELIMINARIES
Throughout this paper, we use Haskell as a vehicle to present all the constructions and results to
make them more accessible to functional programmers. We restrict ourselves to a subset of Haskell
that is total: all recursion is structural; recursive datatypes are inductive; and polymorphism is
predicative, etc. Readers familiar with category theory can understand our notation as a meta-
language denoting constructions around the category of sets: types denote sets; inductive datatypes
denote initial algebras; and polymorphic functions denote ends, etc. In this way, the results developed
in this paper apply to any language implementing effect handlers that has a denotational semantics
based on the constructions studied in this paper (as an illustration, Appendix F shows such a
call-by-value calculus with handlers and a translation to our Haskell constructions). We hope that
our notation can be a good compromise between concreteness and generality.
Functors. In Haskell, a functor f :: ∗ → ∗ is a type constructor instantiating the Functor type
class (Figure 3). It is also expected to satisfy the functor laws:
fmap id = id fmap g ·fmap h = fmap (g ·h)
For any functor f , we call a function of type f c → c an f -algebra and type c the carrier of this
f -algebra. For example, given types P and A, then data Σ x = O P (A → x) with the following
fmap is a functor:
instance Functor Σ where fmap f (O p k ) = O p (f ·k) (4)
Given any two functors f and g, their coproduct f + g is given by the following datatype, and it
can also be equipped with a functor instance.
data (f + g) a = Inl (f a ) | Inr (g a) (5)
fmap h (Inl x ) = Inl (fmap h x ) fmap h (Inr y ) = Inr (fmap h x )
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 6 ---
73:6 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Monads. A functor m is a monad if it instantiates the Monad type class (Figure 3) and adheres
to the monad laws:
join ·return = id join ·fmap return = id join ·join = join ·fmap join (6)
where join::m (m a) → m a is defined by join m = m > >=id. Pioneered by Moggi [1991], monads are
used to model computational effects. Intuitively,return turns a pure value into a trivial computation
causing no effects, andm > >= f executes computation m first, letting its result bex, then executes f x .
Additionally, Haskell supports the do-notation do x ← m; b as a syntactic sugar for m > >= (𝜆x → b).
Free Monads. For any functor f , the inductive datatype Free f is called the free monad from f :
data Free f v = Var v | Op (f (Free f v )) (7)
Intuitively, an element of Free f v is a tree with leaf nodes constructed by Var and internal nodes
constructed by Op, where the functorf determines the branching structure of internal nodes. Given
an f -algebra alg :: f c → c and function gen :: v → c, there is a function fold (also known as
catamorphism) that recursively reduces Free f v to the carrier c of alg:
fold :: Functor f ⇒ ( f c → c) → ( v → c) → Free f v → c
fold alg gen (Var x ) = gen x
fold alg gen (Op op) = alg (fmap (fold alg gen ) op)
(8)
The monad instance of Free f is implemented with fold:
return :: v → Free f v
return = Var
(> >=) :: Free f v → ( v → Free f u ) → Free f u
m > >= f = fold Op f m (9)
Intuitively, return x is a variable x, and m > >= f performs substitution of variables in m using f .
2.1 Algebraic Theories
Plotkin and Power [2002] propose to model a computational effect by an algebraic theory, which is
a set of primitive effectful operations and a set of equations on those operations characterising
the behaviour of the operations. In this section, we provide an account of algebraic theories in our
Haskell notation as the basis for our development.
Signature Functors. A signature is a finite set of operation symbols {Oi}, each paired with
a parameter type Pi and an arity type Ai (or result type by some authors). A signature with n
operations can be described by a signature functor Σ of the following form:
data Σ x = O1 P1 (A1 → x) | O2 P2 (A2 → x) | · · · | On Pn (An → x)
(with the evident Functor instance similar to (4)). In this paper, we use notation O :: P ⇝Σ A to
mean that O is an operation in Σ with parameter type P and arity type A, i.e. there is a constructor
O :: P → ( A → x) → Σ x for the signature functor Σ . We sometimes omit the subscript Σ
in ⇝Σ if it is clear from context. A computational interpretation of a P ⇝ A operation is an
effectful computation taking a P-value and returning an A-value, or equivalently, an operation
parameterised by a P-value and combining |A|-many possible ways of continuing the computation
into one computation [Bauer 2018; Plotkin and Power 2004].
Example 2.1 (Nondeterministic Choice). The signature NDet of nondeterministic choice has one
operation Coin :: () ⇝ Bool with Bool as its arity type. For aesthetic reasons, we prefer the infix
(⊓) :: x → x → NDet x instead of Coin, where
p ⊓ q = Coin () ( 𝜆b → if b then p else q)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 7 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:7
The operation Coin is intended to return a Bool value nondeterministically, or equivalently, p ⊓ q
behaves like p or q nondeterministically.
Example 2.2 (Mutable State). The signature States of mutable state of type s has two operations:
Get :: () ⇝ s and Put :: s ⇝ (). The operation Get is intended to read and return the state, and Put
is intended to overwrite the state with its parameter of type s (and return nothing).
Example 2.3 (Empty Theory). Another theoretically useful algebraic theory is the trivial theory
Empty with no operations and equations. Thus its signature functor Empty has no constructors.
Equations. An equation for a signature Σ is a pair of terms built from operations in Σ and some
free variables. For example, the following is an equation for signature States:
Put u (𝜆() → Put u ′ (𝜆() → k)) = Put u ′ (𝜆() → k) (10)
where u, u′ and k are free variables. Note that we have two kinds of free variables: k stands for a
computation, whereas u and u′ stands for values of type s. One way to formalise equations is to use
the free monad (7): an equation is formalised as a pair of elements of Γ → Free Σ v for some types
Γ and v, where Γ is the type representing all free value variables and v is the type indexing all free
computation variables:
data Equation Σ Γ v = ( ¤=) ( Γ → Free Σ v) ( Γ → Free Σ v) (11)
where binary operator ¤= is the constructor. Free value variables and computation variables are
treated differently to leave the type of computations abstract in equations. For the example (10)
above, Γ is (s, s) since there are two free value variables of type s in the equation, and v is the unit
type () indicating that there is one free computation variable in the equation:
putPutEq :: Equation States (s, s) ()
putPutEq = (lhs ¤= rhs) where
lhs, rhs :: (s, s) → Free States ()
lhs (u, u′) = Op (Put u (𝜆() → Op (Put u ′ (𝜆() → Var ()))))
rhs (u, u′) = Op (Put u ′ (𝜆() → Var ()))
In the main text of this paper, we will stick to the informal form of equations as in (10) for brevity,
and the formal form will only be used in proofs. It is straightforward to convert an informal equation
to the formal form Equation Σ Γ v by collecting free variables of computations into a type v and
free variables of values into a type Γ and inserting Var and Op appropriately.
Example 2.4. Continuing Example 2.2, the theory of mutable state traditionally comes with four
equations [Plotkin and Power 2002]. Letting put s c = Put s (𝜆() → c) and get k = Get () k, the
four equations of mutable state are
put s (get k ) = put s (k s) put s (put s ′ k) = put s ′ k
get (𝜆s → get (𝜆s′ → k s s ′)) = get (𝜆s → k s s ) get (𝜆s → put s k ) = k
where k, s and s′ are all free variables. The type of k may be different for each equation.
Example 2.5. Continuing Example 2.1, the theory NDet of nondeterminism has as equations
idempotence, symmetry and associativity of the operation ⊓, which are the axioms of semi-lattices:
p ⊓ p = p p ⊓ q = q ⊓ p p ⊓ (q ⊓ r) = (p ⊓ q) ⊓ r
where p, q and r are all free variables of computations. The three equations axiomatise the so-called
internal choice in the literature of process algebra, thus the symbol ⊓ is used following Hoare
[1985a] instead of the seemingly more natural ⊔, which is conventionally used for external choice.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 8 ---
73:8 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Definition 2.1 (Equation Respecting). Given (lhs ¤= rhs) :: Equation Σ Γ v and any Σ -algebra
alg :: Σ c → c, we say that alg respects this equation if for all t :: Γ and k :: v → c,
fold alg k (lhs t ) = fold alg k (rhs t )
In other words, substituting alg for operations in the equation and any values for the free variables
in the equation gives equal results.
Example 2.6. Consider the States-algebra algST :: States (s → a) → ( s → a)
algST (Put s ′ k) = 𝜆s → k () s′ algST (Get s k ) = 𝜆s → k s s
It can be checked to respect all the equations in Example 2.4. For example, the first equation
put t (get k ) = put t (k t ) is respected because for all k :: s → s → a and t :: s,
fold alg k (lhs t ) = fold algST k (Op (Put t (𝜆() → Op (Get () ( 𝜆s → Var s)))))
= { recursively fold the Get }
fold algST k (Op (Put t (𝜆() → ( 𝜆s → k s s ))))
= 𝜆s → k t t
= fold algST k (Op (Put t (𝜆() → Var t))) = fold alg k (rhs t )
Example 2.7. Given any semi-lattice (𝐿, ∪), the equations in Example 2.5 are respected by the
NDet-algebra alg (Coin () k) = k True ∪ k False.
Definition 2.2 (Algebraic Theories). An algebraic theory T is a signature functor Σ equipped with
a set of equations of type Equation Σ Γ v for some types Γ and v (different equations may have
different Γ and v’s). We use the notationT :: Theory Σ to mean a theory T of signature Σ .
Algebraic theories are also known asequational theories, which are equivalent toLawvere theories
that present theories as categories [Plotkin and Power 2004]. When the associated equations are
clear, we sometimes abuse the name of a signature functor to mean a theory of this signature. For
example, when we say the theory States in the rest of the paper, we mean the theory of signature
States and the four equations in Example 2.4.
2.2 Combinations of Theories
Hyland et al. [2006] show how algebraic theories can be combined in various ways to specify
the operations and equations of the combined theory based on the sub-theories. In this section,
we reformulate the sum, tensor and distributive tensor [Plotkin and Power 2004] in our simplified
setting for convenience.
For all the ways of combining effect theories in this paper, the operations of the combined
theory are the disjoint union of the operations of the sub-theories, i.e. the signature functor of the
combined theory is the coproduct (5) of the signature functors of the sub-theories. Equations of the
combined theory have greater freedom of choice. A straightforward choice is just taking the union
of the equations of the sub-theories and no more, which is called the sum of the sub-theories.
Definition 2.3(Sum of Theories [Hyland et al. 2006]). The sum of T1::Theory Σ1 and T2::Theory Σ2,
denoted T1 + T2, is the theory of signature Σ1 + Σ2 with exactly the equations of T1 and T2 (regarded
as equations on signature Σ1 + Σ2).
One can also include equations in the combined theory to specify interactions between operations
from the sub-theories, such as commutativity between operations from sub-theories.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 9 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:9
Definition 2.4 (Tensor of Theories [Hyland et al. 2006]). The commutative combination or tensor
of T1 :: Theory Σ1 and T2 :: Theory Σ2, denoted T1 ⊗ T2, is the theory of signature Σ1 + Σ2 with all
equations of T1 and T2, and for each O1 :: P1 ⇝Σ1 A1 and O2 :: P2 ⇝Σ2 A2, a commutativity law:
O1 p1 (𝜆a1 → O2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k a1 a2)) = O2 p2 (𝜆a2 → O1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k a1 a2))
where O1 p k = Inl (O1 p k) and O2 p k = Inr (O2 p k) lift O1 and O2 as operations in signature
Σ1 + Σ2, and p1 :: P1, p2 :: P2 and k are free variables.
Example 2.8. When a program involves two mutable states that are independent of each other,
we can model the situation by the tensor States1 ⊗ States2 of two mutable states, since the order of
two consecutive operations on independent mutable states can be swapped without changing the
semantics of the computation, as long as the parameter of the second operation does not depend
on the result of the first operation.
Another combination that we are going to discuss in Section 7 is adding distributivity laws in
the combination. Distributivity is commonly stated for binary operations, such as for + and ×,
𝑥1 × (𝑦1 + 𝑦2) = (𝑥1 × 𝑦1 + 𝑥1 × 𝑦2) ( 𝑦1 + 𝑦2) × 𝑥2 = (𝑦1 × 𝑥2 + 𝑦2 × 𝑥2)
By passing all operands by a function as we do in signature functors, the distributive laws generalise
to operations O1 :: P1 ⇝ A1 and O2 :: P2 ⇝ A2 with possibly infinite arity:
O1 p1 (𝜆a1 → if a1 ≡ b then
O2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k2 a2) else k1 a1) = O2 p2 (𝜆a2 → O1 p1 (𝜆a1 →
if a1 ≡ b then k2 a2 else k1 a1)) (12)
where computations k1 and k2 and values p1 :: P1, p2 :: P2 and b :: A1 are free variables. Intuitively,
variable b marks the position of the inner computation O2. Thus (12) implies distributivity laws for
all positions of O2 inside O1.
Definition 2.5 (Distributive Tensor [Plotkin and Power 2004]). The distributive combination or
distributive tensor of T1 :: Theory Σ1 and T2 :: Theory Σ2, denoted T1 ⊲ T2, is the theory of signature
Σ1 + Σ2 with all equations of T1 and T2 and additionally for each O1 :: P1 ⇝Σ1 A1 and O2 :: P2 ⇝Σ2 A2,
the distributive law (12) of O1 over O2 (lifted to be operations in Σ1 + Σ2 as in Definition 2.4).
Example 2.9 (Combined Choice). Some nondeterministic systems involve probabilistic behaviour
too. The theory Prob of probabilistic choice has a binary operation PChoose :: Real ⇝ Bool with a
Real parameter in the range [0, 1]. Operation PChoose 𝜃 k is preferably written in infix notation
p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ q = PChoose 𝜃 (𝜆b → if b then p else q) following Hoare [Hoare 1985b]. Letting ¯𝜃 denote
1 − 𝜃, theory Prob has the following equations:
p ⊳1⊲ q = p p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ p = p p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ q = q ⊳ ¯𝜃 ⊲ p
p ⊳𝜃1⊲(q ⊳𝜃2⊲ r) = (p ⊳𝛿1⊲ q) ⊳𝛿2⊲ r (𝜃1 = 𝛿1𝛿2, ¯𝛿2 = ¯𝜃1 ¯𝜃2)
For a system involving nondeterministic choice and probabilistic choice, one desirable interaction
of the two effects is the distributive tensor of Prob over NDet [Mislove et al. 2004], i.e. operations
and equations from both theories with additional equations:
p ⊳𝜃 ⊲(q ⊓ r) = (p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ q) ⊓ ( p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ r) ( p ⊓ q) ⊳𝜃 ⊲ r = (p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ r) ⊓ ( q ⊳𝜃 ⊲ r)
3 SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF COMPUTATIONS
Now that we have theories of effects, we continue to set the stage by showing how one can formalise
the syntax and semantics of computations involving effects. Given an effect theory, the syntax
of computations involving the effect is modelled by terms built from operations of the theory
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 10 ---
73:10 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
(Section 3.1), and semantics is provided by handlers that interpret operations in syntax trees by fold
(Section 3.2). However, we show that the traditional formulation of handlers lacksmodularity when
the effect theory is composed from sub-effects. Particularly, equations respected by one handler
may be invalidated by other handlers when composing handlers together. The problem motivates
modular handlers [Schrijvers et al. 2019], which ensure handlers to work independently of each
other by parametricity (Section 3.3) and play a crucial role in later sections.
3.1 Terms of Computations
Given a signature Σ , computations that involve operations in Σ and produce values of type a are
modelled by the free monad Free Σ a (7). An element of Free Σ a is either Var x, which represents a
pure computation returning x, or Op (O p k ) for some O :: P ⇝Σ A, p :: P and k :: A → Free Σ a ,
which represents a computation making an operation call O with parameter p and continuing as
k x when the result of the operation is x :: A.
Recall that Free Σ is a monad (9), and its> >= precisely means sequential composition of operations
when understanding Free Σ as computations. For any operation O :: P ⇝Σ A, we have a function
O𝑔 :: P → Free Σ A, called a generic operation [Plotkin and Power 2003], such that O𝑔 p =
Op (O p Var). Generic operations and the monadic instance of Free Σ usually allow one to build
computation terms more easily than directly using the underlying constructors.
Example 3.1. The following computation incr :: Free StateInt Int gets the state, increments it and
returns the original value:
incr = Op (Get () ( 𝜆i → Op (Put (i + 1) ( 𝜆() → Var i))))
Using generic operations, incr can be conveniently written as do i ← Get𝑔 (); Put𝑔 (i + 1); return i.
The equations of an effect theory indicate that some computations should be deemed as equivalent,
which is captured by the following relation on computations.
Definition 3.1 (Equivalent Computations). Given a theory T :: Theory Σ and a type a, we define a
binary relation ∼T on elements of Free Σ a inductively by the following rules:
c :: Free Σ a
c ∼T c
Refl
c ∼T d
d ∼T c
Sym
c ∼T d d ∼T e
c ∼T e
Trans
(Oi :: P ⇝ A) ∈ Σ k, k′ :: A → Free Σ a ∀x :: A. k x ∼T k′ x
Op (Oi p k) ∼ T Op (Oi p k ′)
Cong
(( lhs ¤= rhs) :: Equation Σ Γ V ) ∈ T g :: Γ k :: V → Free Σ a
fold Op k (lhs g) ∼ T fold Op k (rhs g)
Eq
Relation c ∼T d captures the idea of two computations being equivalent under theory T. The
first three rules make it an equivalence relation; rule Cong makes it compatible with the structure
of free monad, i.e. a term congruence—whenever k and k′ are equivalent terms, enclosing them in
all contexts Op (Oi p ) is still equivalent; the rule Eq asserts that instantiating equations lhs = rhs
from the theory T with any value g and subterms k gives rise to equivalent computations.
Example 3.2. Consider the theory States from Example 2.4 and computation
incr ′ = do i ← Get𝑔 (); Put𝑔 (i + 1); Put𝑔 (i + 1); return i
With the theory StateInt from Example 2.4, it is derivable that
do {Put𝑔 (i + 1); Put𝑔 (i + 1); return i } ∼ StateInt do {Put𝑔 (i + 1); return i }
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 11 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:11
using the Eq rule and the second equation in Example 2.4. Then using the Cong rule, it is derivable
that incr ′ ∼StateInt incr for the incr from Example 3.1.
The relation ∼T plays an important role in the separation of specification and implementation
of algebraic effects. The ‘user’ of effects uses relation∼T to reason about and optimise programs
without knowing how effect operations are implemented, and the ‘implementer’ of effects is
responsible for the correctness of the implementation with respect to the relation ∼T .
3.2 Traditional Handlers and Non-Modularity
Assuming an effect signature Σ , the simplest form of a handler is a pair of two functions gen :: a →
Free Σ b and alg :: Σ (Free Σ b ) → Free Σ b for some types a and b. We call (gen, alg) a handler
from a to b. It induces a function handleTr (gen, alg) :: Free Σ a → Free Σ b that applies the handler
to a computation Free Σ a by handleTr (gen, alg) = fold alg gen , or more explicitly,
handleTr (gen, alg) ( Var x ) = gen x
handleTr (gen, alg) ( Op (O p k )) = alg (O p (handleTr (gen, alg) · k))
for each operation O in Σ . The gen function corresponds to the ‘return clause’ of handlers inEff
[Bauer and Pretnar 2015] that transforms a pure a-value Var x to a computation of a b-value. The
alg function is the ‘operation clauses’ transforming an operation callO p k with its continuations
k for all possible results of this operation to a computation of a b-value.
Example 3.3. Assuming Σ = States + NDet and a datatype Set a whose elements are subsets of the
set denoted by a, then (genND, algND) below is a handler from a to Set a:
genND x = return { x }
algND (Inl op) = Op (Inl op)
algND (Inr (Coin () k)) = do {l1 ← k True; l2 ← k False; return (l1 ∪ l2) }
Note how alg forwards any operation not in Coin using Op.
Non-Modularity. This formulation of handlers is suitable for giving denotational semantics
to calculi of effect handlers that assume a global signature of effects and do not come with a
type-and-effect system, such as the original one in [Plotkin and Pretnar 2009]. However, this simple
formulation suffers from the problem that a handler of a signature can potentially alter operations
not expected to be handled by it, breaking the modular principle followed by algebraic effects and
causing difficulties in reasoning. We demonstrate the problem in the following example.
Example 3.4. Assuming Σ = States + NDet, consider the following handler (genND ′, algND ′)
genND ′ x = return { x }
algND ′ (Inl op) = Op (Inl op)
algND ′ (Inr (Coin () k)) = do {l1 ← fold alg ′ Var (k True); l2 ← k False; return (l1 ∪ l2) }
where alg′ x = case x of { (Inl (Put s k )) → k (); → Op x }
which handles NDet but additionally erases every call to Put in the first branch of nondetermin-
istic choice using a fold. Compared to (genND, algND) from Example 3.3, (genND ′, algND ′) is less
modular because it not only handles NDet but also alters operations not in NDet. Consequently,
(genND ′, algND ′) interacts less nicely with other handlers. To see this, consider the following handler
(genST , algST ) from a to s → Free (States + NDet) a:
genST x = return (𝜆s → return x)
algST (Inl (Get () k)) = return (𝜆s → do f ← k s; f s )
algST (Inl (Put s ′ k)) = return (𝜆s → do f ← k (); f s ′)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 12 ---
73:12 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
algST (Inr op ) = Op (Inr op )
which respects all the equations of States in Example 2.4. However, the composite handler
handleTr (genST , algST ) · handleTr (genND ′, algND ′)
no longer respects the first equation put s (get k) = put s (k s ) because the left-hand side is
transformed to Var (𝜆s0 → k s 0), while the right-hand side is transformed to Var (𝜆s0 → k s ),
which are not equal in general.
In general, even when (gen1, alg1) and (gen2, alg2) respect effect theories T1 and T2 respectively,
it is not guaranteed that their composite handler respects all the equations in T1 and T2, which
hinders modular reasoning about effect handlers.
3.3 Modular Carriers and Handlers
The problem in the last subsection can be rectified by restricting handlers to modular handlers
introduced by Schrijvers et al. [2019]. The key idea is to require handlers to be explicit about what
operations got handled and be polymorphic (or natural in categorical terminology) in unhandled
operations so that a handler cannot alter unhandled operations arbitrarily, precluding handlers
such as (genND ′, algND ′).
One seemingly reasonable way to achieve this is to require the alg function of a handler of
signature sig to type b to have type
alg :: ∀sig′. sig (Free sig ′ b) → Free sig ′ b
so that alg is polymorphic in the signature sig′ of unhandled operations. Although this restriction
precludes (genND ′, algND ′), this type of alg still exposes the fact that the result is a free monad
Free sig ′ b, and therefore alg can still alter the tree structure of Free sig ′, such as duplicating and
removing nodes in a Free sig ′ b while being polymorphic in sig′. One way to fix this is to increase
the level of abstraction by replacing Free sig ′ with an abstract monad m:
alg :: ∀m. Monad m ⇒ sig (m b) → m b (13)
so that alg is polymorphic in a monad m representing the remaining computational effects in the
computation. This idea is further generalised by Schrijvers et al. [2019] to modular carriers, which
is a type c m parameterised by a monad m that represents the remaining computational effects in
the computation, and moreover, c m should provide a way to forward operations in m.
Definition 3.2 (Modular Carriers [Schrijvers et al. 2019]). Type constructor c :: (∗ → ∗) → ∗ is a
modular carrier if it instantiates the following type class
class MCarrier c where fwd :: Monad m ⇒ m (c m) → c m
subject to the laws of Eilenberg-Moore algebras [Mac Lane 1998], i.e. for every monad m,
fwd ·return = id fwd ·fmap fwd = fwd ·join (14)
The first equation is on type c m → c m , and it states that forwarding a trivial computation
created by return does nothing. The second one is on type m (m (c m )) → c m , and it states
that forwarding two layers of computational effects one-by-one is equivalent to forwarding the
sequential composition of them.
Example 3.5. A straightforward but useful modular carrier is
newtype FreeEM a m = FreeEM {unFreeEM :: m a }
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 13 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:13
in the record syntax of Haskell, which defines a constructor and destructor of the following types:
FreeEM :: m a → FreeEM a m unFreeEM :: FreeEM a m → m a
It is a modular carrier with the following fwd:
instance MCarrier (FreeEM a ) where fwd = FreeEM ·join ·fmap unFreeEM
The laws of monads in (6) imply that the laws in (14) are satisfied. The name FreeEM comes from
the fact that FreeEM a m  m a with join is the free Eilenberg-Moore algebra for a. The scheme in
(13) is then equivalent to alg :: ∀m. Monad m ⇒ sig (FreeEM b m ) → FreeEM b m .
Example 3.6. Another modular carrier is a family of computations indexed by some type s:
newtype StateC s a m = StateC {unStateC :: s → m a }
instance MCarrier (StateC s a ) where fwd mc = StateC (𝜆s → ( do {f ← mc; unStateC f s }))
This carrier is useful for interpreting handlers with parameters [Brady 2013; Kammar et al. 2013].
We will use this carrier for the handler of mutable state very soon.
The fwd function of a modular carrier is polymorphic in any monad m. In particular, when m is
Free sig ′, the following function is able to forward one operation call:
forward :: (MCarrier c , Functor sig ′) ⇒ sig′ (c (Free sig ′)) → c (Free sig ′)
forward op = fwd (Op (fmap return op)) (15)
Definition 3.3(Modular Handlers [Schrijvers et al. 2019]). Given a signaturesig, a modular handler
h for sig from type a to b carried by modular carrier c consists of three functions (gen, alg, run)
packed into the following record:
data MHandler sig c a b = MHandler {gen :: ∀m. Monad m ⇒ a → c m
, alg :: ∀m. Monad m ⇒ sig (c m) → c m
, run :: ∀m. Monad m ⇒ c m → m b }
which induces a function (handle h) :: ∀sig′. Free (sig + sig′) a → Free sig ′ b such that
handle h = run ·fold alg ′ gen
where alg′ (Inl op ′) = alg op ′ and alg′ (Inr op ′) = forward op ′.
The gen and alg functions of a modular handler play similar roles as in traditional handlers. The
run function additionally allows a modular handler to do some post-processing after the fold, such
as providing an initial state to a parameterised handler.
Example 3.7. The handler ofNDet in Example 3.3 can be turned into a modular hander with modular
carrier FreeEM from Example 3.5:
ndetH :: MHandler NDet (FreeEM (Set a)) a (Set a)
ndetH = MHandler {gen = genND, alg = algND, run = unFreeEM } where
genND a = FreeEM (return { a })
algND (Coin () k) = FreeEM (do l1 ← unFreeEM (k True); l2 ← unFreeEM (k False);
return (l1 ∪ l2))
Compared to its non-modular counterpart in Example 3.3, algND does not deal with forwarding
unhandled operations, since they are forwarded by handle.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 14 ---
73:14 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Example 3.8. The handler of States in Example 3.4 can be translated into a modular handler with
modular carrier m (s → m a ), but the outer layer of m is unnecessary, and we can define the
following modular handler of States with carrier StateC s a m  s → m a from Example 3.6:
stH :: s → MHandler State s (StateC s a ) a a
stH s = MHandler {gen = genST , alg = algST , run = (𝜆c → unStateC c s ) } where
genST a = StateC (𝜆s → return a)
algST (Put s ′ k) = StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k ()) s′)
algST (Get () k) = StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k s) s)
The handler takes an additional parameter of s that is used as the initial state by the run function.
4 CORRECTNESS OF TRANSFORMATIONS AND HANDLERS
A notable missing part in the formulation of modular handlers in the previous section (and [Schri-
jvers et al. 2019]) is how modular handlers interact with the equations of effect theories. In this
section, we recover the missing link between modular handlers and equations by defining notions
of correctness of syntax-tree transformations and handlers with respect to effect theories.
Definition 4.1 (Correct Open Transformations). Given a theory T of signature Σ and a function
f of type ∀sig′. Free (Σ + sig′) a → Free sig ′ b for some types a and b, we say that f is a correct
open transformation for T if for all signatures sig′, theories T ′ :: Theory sig ′ and computations
t1, t2 :: Free (Σ + sig′) a,
t1 ∼T +T ′ t2 =⇒ f t 1 ∼T ′ f t 2
where T + T ′ is the sum of T and T ′ (Definition 2.3).
Under a correct open transformation for T, the programmer can freely use the equations from T
to rewrite the operations from T in syntax trees in the presence of operations from other theories.
A weaker notion of correctness is desired when a function on syntax trees is expected only to be
used in the absence of any other effects.
Definition 4.2 (Correct Closed Transformations). Assuming T and f as in Definition 4.1, we call
f a correct closed transformation for T if for all computations t1, t2 :: Free (Σ + Empty) A,
t1 ∼T +Empty t2 =⇒ extract (f t 1) =B extract (f t 2)
where extract :: Free Empty a → a is defined by extract (Var a) = a.
Remark 4.1. The definition of open correctness implies closed correctness by instantiating T ′
with the empty theory Empty.
The correctness of function handle h for some modular handler h is implied by the correctness
of handler h defined as follows.
Definition 4.3 (Correct Open and Closed Handlers) . Letting T be a theory of signature Σ and
h :: MHandler Σ c a b be a modular handler, (a) we call h a correct open handler of T if alg h ::
Monad m ⇒ Σ (c m) → c m respects (in the sense of Definition 2.1) all equations of T for every
monad m, and (b) we call h a correct closed handler of T if alg h respects equations of T when m is
Free Empty.
Theorem 4.1 (Soundness of Correct Handlers). Letting T be a theory of signature Σ and h be a
modular handler of Σ, if h is a correct open (or closed) handler of T , then handle h is a correct open (or
closed) transformation of T .
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 15 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:15
Proof sketch. We generalise handle to work with a polymorphic term monad [Wu and Schri-
jvers 2015] of the remaining effects, which allows us to use parametricity to relate the free monad
Free sig ′ and the monad mapping X to the free model of T ′ generated by X, i.e. Free sig ′ X modulo
relation ∼𝑇 ′. A detailed proof can be found in Appendix C. □
Example 4.1. It can be checked that handler stH from Example 3.8 is a correct open handler of the
theory States (Example 2.4). Consequently, handle stH is a correct open transformation for States.
Example 4.2. It can be checked thatndetH from Example 3.7 is a correct open handler of the associa-
tivity of nondeterministic choice but not the symmetric law or idempotence law from Example 2.5.
This is rather expected because algND in Example 3.7 executes both branches of nondeterministic
choice sequentially. In the open setting, each branch may invoke arbitrary computational effects,
so the symmetric law and idempotence cannot hold because they imply that the two branches can
be swapped or absorbed into one if they invoke the same operations. However, it is a correct closed
handler for all of the laws of NDet since in the closed setting both branches must be pure.
5 FUSING MODULAR HANDLERS
Throughout the section we assume two modular handlers h1 :: MHandler Σ 1 c1 x y and h2 ::
MHandler Σ 2 c2 y z for some modular carriers c1 and c2 and types x, y, z. Their composite
handle h2 ·handle h1 :: ∀sig′. Free (Σ 1 + (Σ 2 + sig′)) x → Free sig ′ z
can interpret operations from Σ 1 + Σ 2 in syntax trees, but which theories does this transformation
respect? This is the question that we answer in the rest of the paper.
The function handle h2 ·handle h1 can be more easily understood if we can find some handler
h3::MHandler (Σ 1+Σ 2) c x z for some modular carrierc satisfying handle h2·handle h1 = handle h3·
assoc where assoc and its inverse assoc◦ is the evident isomorphism between Free (Σ 1 + (Σ 2 + sig′))
and Free (( Σ 1 + Σ 2) + sig′) for all Σ 1, Σ 2 and sig′. In this section, we show how this can be
accomplished by fold/build fusion [Gill et al. 1993; Hinze et al. 2011] and continuation-passing style
(CPS) transformation.
5.1 Carrier Fusion by CPS Transformation
The idea of fold/build fusion is that when we see an operationO2 in the computation when running
h1, the modularity of h1 guarantees that this operation will be handled later by h2. Thus instead of
leaving O2 in the computation, we would like to handle it directly using alg h2 in the fold of h1,
thus fusing the handling of h1 and h2 into one traversal over the syntax tree of the computation.
However, this idea does not directly work because the modular carrier for h2 is only computed
from the final result of h1, and is not available in the stage of running h1. Fortunately, this can be
solved with CPS transformation as shown by Wu and Schrijvers [2015].
Given any type r, the continuation monad with result type r is
newtype Contr a = Cont {runCont :: (a → r) → r } (16)
Intuitively, a computation of some a value in the continuation monad Contr a  (a → r) → r does
not necessarily compute an a-value, but instead it computes an r-value given a continuation a → r.
The monad instance of Contr is witnessed by:
return :: a → Contr a
return x = Cont (𝜆k → k x )
(> >=) :: Contr a → ( a → Contr b) → Contr b
m > >= f = Cont (𝜆k → runCont m (𝜆x → runCont (f x ) k))
The pure computation return x simply supplies x to the continuation. Monadic bind m > >= f runs m
with a continuation that feeds the result x of m to f and runs f with the given continuation k, so
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 16 ---
73:16 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
bind is sequential composition. The continuation monad makes the final result type r explicit, and
one can operate on the final result when it is not actually computed yet, which is demonstrated in
the following minimal example.
Example 5.1. The following function incrCont :: ContInt a → ContInt a takes a computation in the
continuation monad ContInt and increments the integer that will be eventually computed.
incrCont m = Cont (𝜆k → ( runCont m k ) + 1)
By definition, it satisfies that for any k, runCont (incrCont m) k = (runCont m k ) + 1.
Back to the problem of fusing handlers, when running the first handler h1, we can take the final
result type r to be the carrier c2 m of the second handler h2, since c2 m is what will be eventually
computed from the result of handling h1. Furthermore, when we see an operation handled by h2,
now we can let h2 act on the result type c2 m of the continuation monad in the same way as in
Example 5.1. This is made precise by the following lemma.
Lemma 5.1. Given any Σ 2-algebra, i.e. a function alg :: Σ 2 r → r, there is a Σ 2-algebra with carrier
(Contr a) for any type a by
liftAlgCont :: Functor Σ 2 ⇒ ( Σ 2 r → r) → Σ 2 (Contr a) → Contr a
liftAlgCont alg s = Cont (𝜆k → alg (fmap (𝜆m → runCont m k ) s)) (17)
In particular, if r = c2 m, since alg h2 :: Σ 2 (c2 m) → c2 m, then
liftAlgCont (alg h2) :: Σ 2 (Contc2 m a) → Contc2 m a
provides a way to handle operations from Σ 2 using Contc2 m a.
Theorem 5.2 (Modular Carrier Fusion). For any modular carriersc1 and c2, the data typec1 (Contc2 m)
for any m is also a modular carrier.
Proof. First we note that there is a natural transformation from m to Contc2 m (which is essen-
tially Filinski [1999]’s CPS-basedmonadic reflection):
reflectEM :: (MCarrier c 2, Monad m) ⇒ m a → Contc2 m a
reflectEM m = Cont (𝜆k → fwdc2 (fmap k m ))
In fact reflectEM is a monad morphism because it preserves return and join following the laws of
fwd (14). Then we can define the following MCarrier instance:
newtype Fuse c1 c2 m = Fuse {unFuse :: c1 (Contc2 m) }
instance (MCarrier c 1, MCarrier c 2) ⇒ MCarrier (Fuse c1 c2) where
fwd = Fuse ·fwdc1 ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM
The required laws of fwd follow from the corresponding laws of c1 and c2 (Appendix E.1). □
5.2 Fused Modular Handlers
We intend to use Fuse c1 c2 as the modular carrier of the fused handler of h1 and h2, so it should
carry both a Σ 1- and a Σ 2-algebra. Since Fuse c1 c2  c1 (Contc2 m) and Contc2 m is a monad, alg h1
can be used as the Σ 1-algebra for Fuse c1 c2. Also, the Σ 2-algebra alg h2 :: Σ 2 (c2 m) → c2 m can be
lifted to Fuse c1 c2 in the following way:
liftAlgF :: (Σ 2 (c2 m) → c2 m) → ( Σ 2 (Fuse c1 c2 m) → Fuse c1 c2 m)
liftAlgF alg = Fuse ·fwdc1 ·liftAlgCont alg ·fmap (return ·unFuse)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 17 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:17
Theorem 5.3 (Handler Fusion). For any modular handlers h1 and h2, it is the case that handle h2 ·
handle h1 = handle (h2 ⋄ h1) · assoc where assoc is the isomorphism between Free (Σ 1 + (Σ 2 + sig′))
and Free (( Σ 1 + Σ 2) + sig′) and h2 ⋄ h1 is defined as follows:
(⋄) :: (MCarrier c 1, MCarrier c 2, Functor Σ 1, Functor Σ 2)
⇒ MHandler Σ 2 c2 y z → MHandler Σ 1 c1 x y → MHandler (Σ 1 + Σ 2) ( Fuse c1 c2) x z
h2 ⋄ h1 = MHandler {gen = Fuse ·gen h1, alg = algF, run = runF } where
algF (Inl op) = Fuse (alg h1 (fmap unFuse op ))
algF (Inr op ) = liftAlgF (alg h2) op
runF x = run h2 (runCont (run h1 (unFuse x )) ( gen h2))
Proof sketch. We use the technique by Wu and Schrijvers [2015] to fuse handle h2 ·handle h1
into one function and show that the result is equivalent to handle (h2 ⋄ h1). A detailed proof can be
found in Appendix B. □
It is revealing to compare liftAlgF with the forward function (15) of modular handlers. Ignoring
the isomorphisms Fuse and unFuse, we can see that the Op in (15) that forwards an operation call
is replaced by liftAlgCont alg, which is exactly the idea of fold/build fusion.
Corollary 5.4. Let h1 and h2 be modular handlers of signatures Σ1 and Σ2 respectively and T be any
theory of signature Σ1 + Σ2. The function handle h2 ·handle h1 ·assoc◦ is a correct open (or closed)
transformation for T if h2 ⋄ h1 is a correct open (or closed) handler of T .
Proof. By Theorem 5.3, handle h2 ·handle h1 ·assoc◦ = handle (h2 ⋄ h1). Then by Theorem 4.1,
handle (h2 ⋄ h1) is correct for T if h2 ⋄ h1 is correct for T. □
Corollary 5.4 is our main tool to reason about composed transformation handle h2 ·handle h1
because the correctness of h2 ⋄ h1 is spelled by alg (h2 ⋄ h1) (Definition 4.3), which is much simpler
for calculation than handle h2 ·handle h1, a composite of two fold’s. As the first application, we
show that handle h2 ·handle h1 respects equations that are respected by h1 and h2 separately.
Theorem 5.5 (Preservation of Equations). Suppose h1 and h2 are modular handlers of signatures
Σ 1 and Σ 2 respectively. If h1 and h2 are correct open (resp. closed) handlers of T1 :: Theory Σ 1 and
T2 :: Theory Σ2 correspondingly, then h2 ⋄ h1 is a correct open (resp. closed) handler of T1 + T2.
Proof sketch. By Definition 2.3, an equation in T1 + T2 is either an equation from T1 or an
equation from T2. In either case, it can be showed thatalg (h2 ⋄ h1) respects the equation. Appendix
D contains a detailed proof. □
Remark 5.1. The name modular handlers is used by Schrijvers et al. [2019] because they allow
operations to be modularly handled. The theorem above justifies the name to a greater extent: when
two modular handlers are composed together, the equations from both theories are also preserved,
which is not true for non-modular handlers (Example 3.4).
Remark 5.2. If h2 ⋄ h1 is correct (open or closed) for some theory T, then equations in T are
automatically term congruences under handle (h2 ⋄ h1) (and thus handle h2 · handle h1), since
relation ∼𝑇 (Definition 3.1) contains the congruence rule Cong and Theorem 4.1 shows that
handle (h2 ⋄ h1) respects relation ∼𝑇 .
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 18 ---
73:18 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
5.3 Clauses of Fused Handlers
Before we use ⋄ to reason about more interactions of handlers, we calculate some bookkeeping
lemmas that characterise the handling action of h2 ⋄ h1 on operations from the first and the second
theories respectively.
Definition 5.1 (Clauses). Let h be any modular handler with modular carrier C. For any operation
O :: P ⇝ A in Σ, we call the following function the clause for O of h:
c :: Monad m ⇒ P → ( A → C m) → C m
c p k = alg h (O p k )
Lemma 5.6. Let h1 and h2 be two modular handlers with modular carriers C1 and C2 respectively,
and c1 be the clause of h1 for O1 :: P1 ⇝ A1 and c2 be the clause of h2 for O2 :: P2 ⇝ A2. Then the
clause for O1 of h2 ⋄ h1 is
c1 :: Monad m ⇒ P1 → ( A1 → Fuse C1 C2 m) → Fuse C1 C2 m
c1 p1 k = Fuse (c1 p1 (unFuse ·k))
and the clause for O2 of h2 ⋄ h1 is
c2 :: Monad m ⇒ P2 → ( A2 → Fuse C1 C2 m) → Fuse C1 C2 m
c2 p2 k = Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2)))))) (18)
where binder t has type C1 (ContC2 m) → C2 m and fwd is the following instance:
fwd :: ContC2 m (C1 (ContC2 m)) → C1 (ContC2 m)
This lemma can be calculated from the definition of alg (h2 ⋄ h1) (Appendix E.2). It is useful to
simplify c2 from Lemma 5.6 further for specific modular carriers:
Lemma 5.7. Assume the data in Lemma 5.6. When the modular carrier of h1 is FreeEM W for some
type W , (18) is equal to
c2 p2 k = Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a2 q)))) (19)
where k′ = runCont ·unFreeEM ·unFuse ·k. And when the modular carrier of h1 is StateC S W for
some types S and W , (18) is equal to
c2 p2 k = Fuse (StateC (𝜆s → Cont (𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a2 s q))))
where k′ a2 s = runCont (unStateC (unFuse (k a2)) s).
The proof for this lemma is straightforward calculation based on the definitions of fwd for
FreeEM and StateC (see Appendix E.2 for details).
Remark 5.3. Let h1 and h2 be correct (open or closed) handlers of theory T1 and T2 respectively.
With Corollary 5.4 and Lemma 5.7, we can synthesise a sufficient condition forhandle h1 ·handle h2
to be correct for any combination of T1 and T2: given any equation L = R involving operations
from T1 and T2, we substitute c1 for each operation O1 in L = R that comes from T1 and substitute
c2 for each operation O2 that comes from T2. Then we get an equation holds if and only if h2 ⋄ h1 is
correct for this equation by Definition 4.3, and this condition is solely characterised by the clauses
for relevant operations in the equation, rather than involving the whole handler.
In the following sections, we apply this method to the commutative and distributive combinations
of theories and study the correctness of the composite of some common handlers.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 19 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:19
6 REASONING ABOUT COMMUTATIVE INTERACTION
In this section we apply the techniques developed in Section 5 to the tensor (Definition 2.4) of effect
theories. We obtain a condition (20) on the clause of h1 for O1 and the clause of h2 for O2 such that
operations O1 and O2 are commutative under the composite handler handle h2 ·handle h1. Then we
use this result to study the interactions between some common handlers, specifically the handlers
of mutable state, nondeterminism and the writer effect.
Theorem 6.1. Given T1 :: Theory Σ1 and T2 :: Theory Σ2 and h1 :: MHandler Σ1 C1 X Y and
h2 :: MHandler Σ2 C2 Y Z , if h1 and h2 are correct open (or closed) handlers of T1 and T2 respectively,
a sufficient condition for h2 ⋄ h1 to be a correct open (or closed) handler of the tensor T1 ⊗ T2 is: for
each O1 :: P1 ⇝Σ1 A1 and O2 :: P2 ⇝Σ2 A2, letting c1 be the clause for O1 of h1 and c2 be the clause for
O2 of h2 as in Definition 5.1, it holds that
c1 p1 (𝜆a1 → fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → t (k a1 a2)))))
= fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → t (c1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k a1 a2))))) (20)
for all p1 :: P1, p2 :: P2 and k :: A1 → A2 → C1 (ContC2 m) for every monad m (or m = Free Empty
for closed correctness). In (20), binder t has type C1 (ContC2 m) → C2 m and fwd is the instance
fwd :: ContC2 m (C1 (ContC2 m)) → C1 (ContC2 m).
Proof. It directly follows from the characterisation of clauses forO1 and O2 of h2 ⋄ h1 (Lemma 5.6):
substituting c1 and c2 in Lemma 5.6 for O1 and O2 in Definition 2.4 of the tensor results in (20). □
Since FreeEM and StateC cover almost all examples of modular handlers in practice, we specialise
the theorem above to these two cases and obtain conditions easier to use.
Corollary 6.2. When the modular carrier C1 of h1 is FreeEM W m for some type W , we can simplify
(20) with Lemma 5.7. Define c′
1 and k′ as follows to unwrap the constructors:
c′
1 :: P1 → ( A1 → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m) → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m
c′
1 p a = runCont (unFreeEM (c1 p (FreeEM ·Cont ·a)))
k′ :: A1 → A2 → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m
k′ a1 a2 = runCont (unFreeEM (k a1 a2))
Then (20) is equivalent to
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → ( 𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 q)))
= 𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) q) (21)
where binder q has type W → C2 m.
Corollary 6.3. When the modular carrier of h1 is StateC S W m , (20) can be simplified with the
corresponding result of Lemma 5.7 too. Define c′
1 and k′ as follows to unwrap the constructors:
c′
1 :: P1 → ( A1 → S → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m) → ( S → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m)
c′
1 p k = runCont ·unStateC (c1 p (𝜆a → StateC (Cont ·k a)))
k′ :: A1 → A2 → S → ( W → C2 m) → W
k′ a1 a2 s = runCont (unStateC (k a1 a2) s)
Then (20) can be simplified to
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 s q))
= 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) s q) (22)
where binder q :: W → C2 m.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 20 ---
73:20 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
6.1 Combining Nondeterminism and State
Theorem 6.4. Handler ndetH ⋄ stH s0 (Example 3.7 and Example 3.8) is a correct closed handler of
the tensor of NDet and States.
Proof. For each pair of op1 ∈ { Get, Put} and op2 ∈ { Coin} we verify that (22) holds. For
op1 = Get and op2 = Coin, we have
c′
1 () k = 𝜆s → k s s (23)
Then we can establish (22) by plugging in c′
1 and simplifying both sides:1
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 s q)) {↓ definition (23) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ s a2 s q) {↑ definition (23) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) s q)
For op1 = Put, op2 = Coin and any p1 :: s, we have
c′
1 p k = 𝜆s → k () p (24)
Accordingly, we calculate:
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 s q)) {↓ definition (24) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ () a2 p1 q) {↑ definition (24) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆s q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) s q)
Since handlers ndetH and stH are correct closed handlers for NDet and States, we can conclude that
ndetH ⋄ stH s is a correct closed handler of the tensor of nondeterminism and mutable state. □
Note that in the proof we did not rely on any property of c2 or ndetH. In fact, we can strengthen
the above proof to arbitrary handler h in place of ndetH.
Theorem 6.5. Given a correct open (or closed) handler h of effect theory T , handler h ⋄ stH s is a
correct open (or closed) handler of the tensor of T and the theory of mutable state.
Remark 6.1. Pauwels et al. [2019] axiomatise the local state semantics of the combination of state
and nondeterminism by the sum of States and NDet with additionally two right-zero and right-
distributive laws. Both of the additional laws can be derived from the equations of States ⊗ NDet
and algebraicity (Appendix E.3). Thus ndetH ⋄ stH s is a correct (closed) handler of the local state
semantics in [Pauwels et al. 2019].
By contrast, handling nondeterminism before state with stH s ⋄ ndetH will not validate the
conditions of the corresponding Corollary 6.2. For example, if op1 = Coin and op2 = Put, then
c′
1 () k = 𝜆q → k True (𝜆l1 → k False (𝜆l2 → q (l1 ∪ l2))) (25)
c2 p2 k = StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k ()) p2) (26)
The left-hand side of (21) becomes
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 q)) { definition (26) of c2 }
= c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ a1 () q) p2)) { definition (25) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ True () ( 𝜆l1 →
StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ False () ( 𝜆l2 → q (l1 ∪ l2))) p2) )) p2)
and the right-hand side becomes:
𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) q) { definition (26) of c2 }
1The arrows in the proof hints indicate the natural direction to read the calculation step.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 21 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:21
= 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 ()) q) p2) { definition (25) of c′
1 }
= 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ True () ( 𝜆l1 →
k′ False () ( 𝜆l2 → q (l1 ∪ l2)) )) p2)
The boxed parts are the difference between both sides, making (21) not hold in general. The difference
also matches our intuition: if nondeterminism is handled first, computation {b ← coin; put p2; k b }
corresponding to the left-hand side is transformed to {put p2; k True; put p2; k False } by ndetH,
while computation {put p2; b ← coin; k b } corresponding to the right-hand side is transformed to
{put p2; k True; k False }. This explains why the boxed part of the left-hand side is StateC (𝜆s →
RB p2) where RB is the boxed part in the right-hand side.
Remark 6.2. Pauwels et al. [2019] axiomatise the global state semantics of the combination of
state and nondeterminism by the sum of States and NDet in addition with the following put-or law:
(Put s (𝜆() → m)) ⊓ n = Put s (𝜆() → m ⊓ n)
It is not difficult to show that stH s ⋄ ndetH is a correct open handler for this law using Lemma 5.7
(Appendix E.4), and thus it is a correct closed handler of the global state semantics.
6.2 Combining State and Writer
For another example, we prove that handling the writer effect and mutable state in either order is a
correct handler of their tensor. The writer effect Writer w is parameterised by a monoid w with
unit mempty and operation ⋄, and it has one operation Tell :: w ⇝ () with an accumulation law:
Tell w1 (Tell w2 k) = Tell (w1 ⋄ w2) k
The writer effect can be handled by the following handler:
wtH :: Monoid w ⇒ MHandler (Writer w ) ( FreeEM (a, w)) a (a, w)
wtH = MHandler gen alg unFreeEM where
gen a = FreeEM (return (a, mempty))
alg (Tell w k ) = FreeEM (do (a, u) ← unFreeEM (k ()) ; return (a, w ⋄ u))
It is straightforward calculation to verify that wtH is a correct open handler of the accumulation
law (see Appendix E.5 for details).
Theorem 6.6. Both stH s ⋄ wtH and wtH ⋄ stH are correct open handlers of the tensor of mutable
state and writer.
Proof sketch. Following Theorem 6.5, wtH ⋄ stH s is a correct open handler of the tensor, and
Corollary 6.2 can be used to show that stH s ⋄ wtH is correct. A detailed calculation can be found
in Appendix E.5. □
7 REASONING ABOUT DISTRIBUTIVE INTERACTION
We apply the technique so far to distributive tensor of effects (Definition 2.5) in this section. We
present a condition similar to Theorem 6.1 on two modular handlers for their composite to be
correct with respect to the distributive tensor of the sub-theories, and a specialised version similar
to Corollary 6.2 when the modular carrier is FreeEM. Then we use the results to reason about the
correctness of composing the handlers of nondeterministic and probabilistic choice with respect to
the theory of combined choice discussed in Example 2.9.
Theorem 7.1. Given T1::Theory Σ1 and T2::Theory Σ2 and modular handlersh1::MHandler Σ1 C1 X Y
and h2 :: MHandler Σ2 C2 Y Z , if h1 and h2 are correct open (or closed) handlers of T1 and T2 respec-
tively, a sufficient condition for h2 ⋄ h1 to be a correct open (or closed) handler of the distributive tensor
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 22 ---
73:22 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
T1 ⊲ T2 of T1 over T2 is: for each O1 :: P1 ⇝Σ1 A1 and O2 :: P2 ⇝Σ2 A2 of Σ2, letting c1 be the clause for
O1 of h1 and c2 be the clause for O2 of h2 as in Definition 5.1, it holds that
c1 p1 (𝜆a1 →
if a1 ≡ b then fwd (Cont (𝜆t →
c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → t (k2 a2))))
else k1 a1)
=
fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 →
t (c1 p1 (𝜆a1 →
if a1 ≡ b then k2 a2
else k1 a1)))))
(27)
for all b :: A1, p1 :: P1, p2 :: P2, every monad m (or m = Free Empty for closed correctness), and
k1 :: A1 → C1 (ContC2 m) k2 :: A2 → C1 (ContC2 m)
Proof. By Definition 2.5, Lemma 5.6 and Definition 4.3, substituting c1 and c2 in Lemma 5.6 for
O1 and O2 in (12) results in (27). □
Corollary 7.2. If the modular carrier of h1 is FreeEM W for some type W , by Lemma 5.7 the condition
above can be simplified to
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 →
if a1 ≡ b then
𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k2 ′ a2 q)
else k1 ′ a1)
=
𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 →
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 →
if a1 ≡ b then k2 ′ a2
else k1 ′ a1) q)
(28)
where c′
1, k1 ′ and k2 ′ are the corresponding unprimed function with various data constructors un-
wrapped:
k1 ′ :: A1 → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m k 2 ′ :: A2 → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m
c′
1 :: P1 → ( A1 → ( W → C2 m) → C2 m) → (( W → C2 m) → C2 m)
We leave out the specialised version for C1 = StateC for the sake of space.
7.1 Handling Combined Choice
Cheung [2017] shows that models of combined choice Prob ⊲ NDet in Example 2.9 are exactly
algebras of the geometrically convex monad (roughly speaking, the monad mapping a to the set
of convex sets of distributions over a-elements), but it is not obvious if composing the standard
handlers of the two theories gives rise to such a model, i.e. handling the distributive tensor correctly.
In this subsection, we explore this question using Theorem 7.1.
A computation using probabilistic choice can be handled to a probability distribution of outcomes
which we represent as functions type Distr a = a → Real which range in interval [0, 1] and sums
to 1 for all elements of a. Two distributions can be convexly combined by +𝜃 ::Distr a → Distr a →
Distr a for any 𝜃 ∈ [ 0, 1]:
d1 +𝜃 d2 = 𝜆x → 𝜃 ∗ d1 x + (1 − 𝜃 ) ∗ d2 x
Theory Prob (Example 2.9) can be closed-correctly handled by running both branches in sequence
and convexly combine the results:
probH :: Eq a ⇒ MHandler Prob (FreeEM (Distr a )) a (Distr a )
probH = MHandler gen alg unFreeEM where
gen x = FreeEM (return (𝜆y → if y ≡ x then 1 else 0))
alg (PChoose 𝜃 k) = FreeEM (
do d1 ← unFreeEM (k True); d2 ← unFreeEM (k False); return (d1 +𝜃 d2))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 23 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:23
In this section, we focus on the correctness of the composite handler ndetH ⋄ probH with respect
to Prob ⊲ NDet. Since probH has modular carrier FreeEM (Distr a), we can try Corollary 7.2. The
corresponding clauses for ⊳𝜃 ⊲ and ⊓ are
c′
1 𝜃 k = 𝜆q → k True (𝜆d1 → k False (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2)))
c2 () k = FreeEM (do {l1 ← unFreeEM (k True); l2 ← unFreeEM (k Flase); return (l1 ∪ l2) })
The left-hand side of the proof obligation (28) is
c′
1 𝜃 (𝜆a1 → if a1 ≡ b then 𝜆q → c2 () ( 𝜆a2 → k2 ′ a2 q) else k1 ′ a1) { definition of c2 () }
= c′
1 𝜃 (𝜆a1 → if a1 ≡ b then 𝜆q → FreeEM (do {l1 ← unFreeEM (k2 ′ True q);
l2 ← unFreeEM (k2 ′ False q); return (l1 ∪ l2) }) else k1 ′ a1)
Let us consider the case b = False first, which corresponds to the left distributivity p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ (q ⊓ r).
Setting b = False and expanding c′
1 𝜃, the last equation becomes
𝜆q → k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 → FreeEM (do {l1 ← unFreeEM (k2 ′ True (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))) ;
l2 ← unFreeEM (k2 ′ False (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))) ; return (l1 ∪ l2) })) (29)
Now from the right-hand side of (28), we calculate:
𝜆q → c2 () ( 𝜆a2 → c′
1 𝜃 (𝜆a1 → if a1 ≡ b then k2 ′ a2 else k1 ′ a1) q)
{ definition c′
1 𝜃 }
= 𝜆q → c2 () ( 𝜆a2 → k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 → k2 ′ a2 (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))))
{ definition of c2 () }
= 𝜆q → FreeEM (do l1 ← unFreeEM (k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 → k2 ′ True (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))))
l2 ← unFreeEM (k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 → k2 ′ False (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))))
return (l1 ∪ l2))
(30)
It is not difficult to see (29) ≠ (30) for arbitrary monad m in general, which matches our intuition:
under ndetH ⋄ probH, computation p ⊳𝜃 ⊲(q ⊓ r) executes p once but (p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ q) ⊓ ( p ⊳𝜃 ⊲ r) executes
p twice. Thus ndetH ⋄ probH is not a correct open handler of Prob ⊲ NDet, but is it a correct closed
handler of Prob ⊲ NDet? When m is the identity monad Free Empty, the do-notations in (29) and
(30) degenerate to let-bindings, and (29) = (30) is equivalent to
𝜆q →
k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 →
let l1 = k2 ′ True (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))
l2 = k2 ′ False (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2))
in l1 ∪ l2)
=
𝜆q → let l1 = k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 →
k2 ′ True (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2)))
l2 = k1 ′ True (𝜆d1 →
k2 ′ False (𝜆d2 → q (d1 +𝜃 d2)))
in l1 ∪ l2
(31)
where k1 ′, k2 ′ :: Bool → ( Distr A → Set (Distr A)) → Set (Distr A). However, (31) still does not
hold in general. Thus our attempt with Corollary 7.2 seems inconclusive.
However, with a closer look we notice that the functions k1 ′ and k2 ′ bear some properties not
manifested in their types: they correspond to handled subterms of the computation, and therefore
they must be built from gen (ndetH ⋄ probH) and alg (ndetH ⋄ probH). Indeed, if f :: (Distr A →
Set (Distr A)) → Set (Distr A) is built from gen (ndetH ⋄ probH) and alg (ndetH ⋄ probH), then it
satisfies
f (𝜆x → g x ∪ h x) = f g ∪ f h (32)
and (32) for f = k1 ′ True implies (31).
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 24 ---
73:24 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
7.2 Generalising the Continuation Monad
Note that Set (Distr A) with join operation ∪ is a semi-lattice, and for any set X, functions
X → Set (Distr A) can be equipped with a semi-lattice structure with the join operation defined
pointwise: for any g, h :: X → Set (Distr A),
g ∪ h = 𝜆x → g x ∪ h x
Then (32) states that f is a join-preserving mapping, i.e. an arrow in the category SL of semi-lattice.
It is a standard result in category theory that there is an adjunctive bijection for any semi-lattices
𝐴, 𝐵, and set 𝑋
SLop (𝐵𝑋 , 𝐴)  Set (𝑋 ,SL(𝐴, 𝐵))
where SLop (𝐵𝑋 , 𝐴) is the set of join-preserving functions from semi-lattice 𝐴 to 𝐵𝑋 and SL(𝐴, 𝐵) is
the set of of join-preserving functions from 𝐴 to 𝐵, and Set (𝑋 , 𝑌) is the set of functions from 𝑋 to
𝑌 for any 𝑋 and 𝑌 . Consequently, this adjunction gives rise to a monad onSet mapping X to the set
SL(𝐵𝑋 , 𝐵) for any semi-lattice 𝐵. Then replacing Cont in the construction of Fuse in Theorem 5.2
with this monad will allow us to prove (31) and thus ndetH ⋄ probH is a correct closed handler of
the theory Prob ⊲ NDet of combined choice.
More generally, for any category 𝐶 with powers [Mac Lane 1998, p.70], there is an adjunction
Cop (𝐵𝑋 , 𝐴)  Set (𝑋 ,C (𝐴, 𝐵))
and monad 𝑋 ↦→ C (𝐵𝑋 , 𝐵) for every object 𝐵 in 𝐶 [Hinze 2012]. When C is Set, it is exactly the
continuation monad. Some other instances are studied in the context of categorical semantics of
predicate transformers [Hino et al. 2016; Jacobs 2017]. Similar to the situation of combined choice
where we need C = SL, in some applications we may need to choose appropriate 𝐶 to reflect the
invariants in the handled computations that are preserved by the clauses of the handler to prove
the correctness of composite handlers.
In summary, in this section we have explored showing the correctness of ndetH ⋄ probH with
respect to the distributive tensor Prob ⊲ NDet, and it turns out that our technique (Theorem 7.1)
is not powerful enough to do so. As we analysed above, this limitation is caused by the fact that
some application-specific invariants are lost in the types, which can be overcome by replacing the
continuation monad used in Theorem 5.2 with a generalised form. Although we see no substantial
difficulty in doing so, we leave adapting the theorems in this paper to the generalised form and a
systematic study of interesting examples needing this generalisation as future work.
8 RELATED WORK
Combinations of Effects . Hyland et al . [2006] study the sum and tensor of computational
effects and show that the sum with the theory of exceptions and interactive IO, and the tensor with
mutable state lead to the corresponding monad transformers, and later Cheung [2017] follows this
line of research and studies the distributive tensor of effect theories, in particular, the connection
with the distributive laws of monads and the example of combining nondeterminism and proba-
bilistic choice. Their work gives a unified account of modularity for computational effects and our
work aims to connect this modularity with the modularity of handlers.
Effect Handlers. In the original work on effect handlers [Plotkin and Pretnar 2009, 2013], a
global effect theory is assumed throughout the language. To avoid the interdependence of typing
handlers and proving them correct, Plotkin and Pretnar [2009] provide two calculi (one for defining
handlers and one for using them) and, accordingly, two equational logics extending the logic by
Plotkin and Pretnar [2008] (one for proving handlers correct and the other for reasoning about
computations using handlers). The later work [Plotkin and Pretnar 2013] adopts a simpler approach
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 25 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:25
by leaving semantics of incorrect (though well-typed) handlers undefined. In comparison, in this
paper handlers interpret signatures instead of theories, so correctness respecting theories becomes
an extrinsic property of handlers.
Because many practically useful handlers do not respect the standard theories of their effects and
fundamentally the correctness of handlers is undecidable [Plotkin and Pretnar 2013], most later
work (with the exceptions [Ahman 2017; Kiselyov et al. 2021; Lukšič and Pretnar 2020]) on effect
handlers only considers effect theories with no equations, resulting in fewer reasoning principles
for algebraic effects and consequently weaker guarantee of correctness.
Ahman [2017] presents a dependently typed language in which handlers (and proofs showing
their satisfaction of the equations of the theory) are represented as user-defined algebra types
and applying handlers is done using sequential composition. With the power of dependent types,
Ahman [2017] uses handlers to define predicates on effectful computations.
Lukšič and Pretnar [2020] present a type system in which computation types are tagged with a set
of equations expected to hold, and the type system is parameterised by a reasoning logic that allows
the programmer to actually prove that the equations are respected by a handler. Typical choices
of the reasoning logic are those in [Plotkin and Pretnar 2008; Pretnar 2010]. In comparison, our
paper is more about techniques for reducing the actual proof work of the correctness of composite
handlers, and less about formalising languages and logics in which the proof can be done. However,
the semi-formal way of working with equations used in our paper aligns well with Lukšič and
Pretnar [2020]’s formalisms: computations are interpreted by free monads ignoring the equations,
and equations are separately interpreted as a relation. Thus the systems in [Lukšič and Pretnar
2020] suits well for formalising our results, which is an important piece of future work.
Kiselyov et al. [2021] advocate a different philosophy about the relationship between equations
and handlers—they advocate that equations should be distilled from handlers rather than specify
handlers a priori. They also study the equations respected by the handlers of state, nondeterminism
and their composites. However, from either viewpoint, the eventual proof obligation is the same—an
equation is respected by a handler. Thus the results developed in this paper for proving a composite
handler respecting some equation are applicable in their setting too. They also emphasise that
equational laws should be term congruences under a handler, which is reflected by the Cong rule
in our definition of equivalent computations ∼𝑇 (Definition 3.1). Our restriction of modularity is
reminiscent of the restriction in [Kiselyov et al. 2021] that operations must be uniquely handled by
the concerned handler in their formulation of equivalence modulo handlers.
Zhang and Myers [2019] present an operational semantics for a language with effect poly-
morphism based on tunneling in which the parametricity theorem holds for effect-polymorphic
functions. In comparison, we have focused exclusively on denotational semantics of effect handlers
(presented in Haskell), and we achieve effect polymorphism by being polymorphic in the signature
functors, utilising the polymorphic mechanisms of Haskell. Since our technique of handler fusion
crucially relies on parametricity, we expect our results to hold only in an operational semantics
admitting the parametricity theorem, such as Zhang and Myers [2019]’s and Brachthäuser et al.
[2020]’s. Otherwise, a handler may accidentally intercept operations supposed to be handled by
other handlers, breaking the modularity of handlers.
Schrijvers et al . [2019] introduce modular handlers that play an essential role in this paper.
They also compare modular handlers to monad transformers, showing that the expressibility of
modular handlers and monad transformers implementing only algebraic operations are equivalent
in Haskell. However, the equal expressibility crucially depends on the features present in the
language, as demonstrated by Forster et al . [2017] that there is no type-preserving translation
from effect handlers to layered monads [Filinski 1999] in a call-by-push-value calculus without
polymorphism and inductive types. In [Schrijvers et al. 2019], equations of algebraic theories are
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 26 ---
73:26 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
not considered, which we recover in this paper. We also formalise notions of the correctness of
modular handlers and study the correctness of composite modular handlers using handler fusion.
Xie et al. [2020] introduce the scoped-resumption restriction on handlers to simplify reasoning
and aid optimisation, while we impose the modular restriction for a similar purpose. Indeed, their
non-scoped example in [Xie et al. 2020, Section 2.2] can be rejected by the modular restriction too.
However, they check scoped resumptions dynamically, whereas modular handlers are statically
typed. It is interesting future work to establish the relationship between these two restrictions.
Hillerström and Lindley [2018] introduce shallow handlers that semantically corresponds to
case-splits on syntax trees of computations, whereas traditional deep handlers correspond to
catamorphisms. When used with general recursion, shallow handlers can conveniently implement
handling schemes that do not fit in the structure of deep handlers, such as handling two mutually
dependent programs. However, this is at the cost of relinquishing structural recursion inherent in
deep handlers that offers the programmer more reasoning principles. In particular, we have shown
how the fusion property can be used to reason about composites of deep handlers.
The techniques developed in this paper only apply to modular handlers. However, not all handlers
in the various languages discussed above are modular. A rough criterion is that a handler is modular
as long as it does not use its resumption in any way other than invoking it. In particular, it cannot
apply the handling construct on its resumption. For languages implementing effect polymorphism
such as Koka [Leijen 2017], this condition is a consequence of a handler being polymorphic in
unhandled operations. For languages without effect polymorphism such as those in [Bauer and
Pretnar 2014; Plotkin and Pretnar 2009], this is not automatically guaranteed. Appendix F shows a
fine-grained call-by-value calculus of handlers in which all handlers must be modular. Although
most handlers appearing in the literature are modular, there is an example of non-modular handlers
of mutable state by handling the get operation in the clause of put operation in [Biernacki et al.
2017, page 4]. We leave extending our work to non-modular handlers as future work.
CPS Transformations. There is a lot of work on using CPS transformations to optimise effectful
programs. Here we discuss some typical ones in the context of algebraic effects and handlers and
compare them with the transformation that we use for fusing handlers.
Voigtländer [2008] shows that CPS transformation of free monads with the codensity monad
gives an asymptotic improvement on the time complexity of monadic binding operations. Kammar
et al. [2013] use CPS transformations based on the codensity and continuation monads in their
implementations of effect handlers, in which the continuation monad is iterated to allow the
operations in a computation to be handled by differentopen handlers, a concept that we borrow and
use in this paper. Schuster et al. [2020] translate effectful programs written in capability-passing
style into iterated continuation passing style. They also statically specialise the abstract capabilities
in a CPS translated program to corresponding concrete handlers by translating to a two-stage
simply typed lambda calculus, and thus eliminate all handling constructs in the translation result.
Compared to these works that apply CPS transformations to computations for performance
improvement, this paper uses CPS transformation on handlers instead of computations, and the
purpose is mostly for reasoning about handlers. Despite different motivations, the techniques of
CPS transformation are similar, and we believe that it is possible to devise a handling-eliminating
translation similar to the one given in [Schuster et al. 2020] if we iteratively fuse all handlers using
our fusion combinator and inline the resulting all-in-one handler into a computation.
Our handler fusion is directly inspired by the work by Wu and Schrijvers [2015] with the minor
difference that we use the continuation monad instead of the codensity monad for CPS transfor-
mation, and they rely on the compiler to perform static fusion, whereas our fusion combinator
explicitly gives the result of fusion when the handlers are defined in the form of modular handlers.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 27 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:27
Similar fusion technique is also used by Seynaeve et al. [2020] to eliminate intermediate lists when
implementing nondeterminism with mutable state.
Proof Assistants for Equational Reasoning . The results of this paper allow the programmer
to prove the correctness of composite handlers by doing equational reasoning about the clauses of
handlers. However, all the proofs, both of our theorems and the use cases of the theorems, in this
paper are done in a paper-and-pencil style. Thus we expect that the proposed technique would be
more usable for programmers if there are mechanised tools for equational reasoning about programs
when applying the proposed technique. This can be possibly achieved by resorting to existing proof
assistants supporting equational reasoning about Haskell programs. Among them, LiquidHaskell
[Vazou et al. 2018, 2017] seems promising, since it utilises SMT solvers to automatically verify
the equality of programs. Another option is converting Haskell programs to Coq using the tools
by Breitner et al. [2018]; Spector-Zabusky et al. [2018] and doing equational reasoning therein
(with libraries like [Tesson et al. 2011] that aid with equational reasoning). Beyond formalising
equational reasoning about handlers, a complete mechanised formalisation of the theorems in the
paper is also an interesting piece of future work.
9 CONCLUSION
This paper has studied a way to reason about the semantics of sequentially composed handlers by
fusing them into one, which allows us to derive relatively simple conditions for the semantics of the
composite handler to agree with any combination of the effect theories separately handled. With this
connection between modular specifications (effect theories) of effects and modular implementations
(handlers) of effects, programmers are furnished with a principled way to determine the right order
of composing handlers for their need by equational reasoning, as demonstrated in several case
studies. The following directions can be explored in the future:
• We wish to find a concise categorical formulation of modular carriers and handlers, so that the
techniques in this paper can be generalised to categories other than the category of sets.
• Our equational proofs in this paper are done in a paper-and-pencil way. It will be useful to find a
way to formalise them with reasonable effort and even automate them.
• As demonstrated in Section 7.2, the continuation monad used for fusion needs to be generalised
in some cases. We wish to find more examples of this and make a systematic study.
• The fusion combinator of modular handlers can possibly be used to implement a compiler of
effect handlers that fuses all handlers that can be determined at compile time and inline them
into computations.
• We have only considered algebraic operations and we wish to extend this techniques in the paper
to a broader family such as scoped operations [Piróg et al. 2018].
Effect handlers have proven to be a powerful construct for modelling language features modularly,
but a powerful construct is only useful when powerful reasoning techniques are available. We hope
that this paper can inspire more reasoning techniques for handlers to be developed in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by EPSRC grant number EP/S028129/1 on ‘Scoped Contextual
Operations and Effects’. The authors would like to thank Josh Ko, Marco Paviotti, Tom Schrijvers,
Shin-Cheng Mu and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback.
REFERENCES
Danel Ahman. 2017. Handling Fibred Algebraic Effects. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, POPL, Article 7 (Dec. 2017), 29 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3158095
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 28 ---
73:28 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Andrej Bauer. 2018. What is algebraic about algebraic effects and handlers? arXiv:1807.05923 [cs.LO] https://arxiv.org/abs/
1807.05923
Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. 2014. An Effect System for Algebraic Effects and Handlers. Logical Methods in Computer
Science 10, 4 (Dec 2014). https://doi.org/10.2168/lmcs-10(4:9)2014
Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. 2015. Programming with algebraic effects and handlers. Journal of Logical and Algebraic
Methods in Programming 84, 1 (2015), 108–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlamp.2014.02.001
Dariusz Biernacki, Maciej Piróg, Piotr Polesiuk, and Filip Sieczkowski. 2017. Handle with Care: Relational Interpretation of
Algebraic Effects and Handlers. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, POPL, Article 8 (Dec. 2017), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3158096
Jonathan Immanuel Brachthäuser, Philipp Schuster, and Klaus Ostermann. 2020. Effekt: Capability-passing style for
type- and effect-safe, extensible effect handlers in Scala. Journal of Functional Programming 30 (2020), e8. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0956796820000027
Edwin Brady. 2013. Programming and Reasoning with Algebraic Effects and Dependent Types. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (Boston, Massachusetts, USA) (ICFP ’13). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 133–144. https://doi.org/10.1145/2500365.2500581
Joachim Breitner, Antal Spector-Zabusky, Yao Li, Christine Rizkallah, John Wiegley, and Stephanie Weirich. 2018. Ready,
Set, Verify! Applying Hs-to-Coq to Real-World Haskell Code (Experience Report). Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, ICFP,
Article 89 (July 2018), 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236784
Kwok-Ho Cheung. 2017. Distributive interaction of algebraic effects . Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Oxford.
Andrzej Filinski. 1999. Representing Layered Monads. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages (San Antonio, Texas, USA) (POPL ’99). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 175–188. https://doi.org/10.1145/292540.292557
Yannick Forster, Ohad Kammar, Sam Lindley, and Matija Pretnar. 2017. On the Expressive Power of User-Defined Effects:
Effect Handlers, Monadic Reflection, Delimited Control. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 1, ICFP, Article 13 (Aug. 2017),
29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3110257
Jeremy Gibbons and Ralf Hinze. 2011. Just do it: simple monadic equational reasoning. Proceeding of the 16th ACM SIGPLAN
international conference on Functional programming - ICFP ’11 (2011), 2. https://doi.org/10.1145/2034773.2034777
Andrew Gill, John Launchbury, and Simon L. Peyton Jones. 1993. A Short Cut to Deforestation. InProceedings of the Conference
on Functional Programming Languages and Computer Architecture (Copenhagen, Denmark) (FPCA ’93). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 223–232. https://doi.org/10.1145/165180.165214
Daniel Hillerström and Sam Lindley. 2018. Shallow Effect Handlers. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 11275 LNCS (2018),
415–435. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02768-1_22
W. Hino, H. Kobayashi, I. Hasuo, and B. Jacobs. 2016. Healthiness from Duality. Proceedings - Symposium on Logic in
Computer Science 05-08-July (2016), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/2933575.2935319 arXiv:arXiv:1605.00381v1
Ralf Hinze. 2012. Kan Extensions for Program Optimisation Or: Art and Dan Explain an Old Trick. In Mathematics of
Program Construction, Jeremy Gibbons and Pablo Nogueira (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 324–362.
https://doi.org/978-3-642-31113-0_16
Ralf Hinze, Thomas Harper, and Daniel W. H. James. 2011. Theory and Practice of Fusion. InImplementation and Application
of Functional Languages, Jurriaan Hage and Marco T. Morazán (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
19–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24276-2_2
C. A. R. Hoare. 1985a. Communicating Sequential Processes. Prentice-Hall, Inc., USA.
C. A. R. Hoare. 1985b. A Couple of Novelties in the Propositional Calculus. Mathematical Logic Quarterly 31, 9-12 (1985),
173–178. https://doi.org/10.1002/malq.19850310905
Martin Hyland, Gordon Plotkin, and John Power. 2006. Combining Effects: Sum and Tensor. Theor. Comput. Sci. 357, 1 (July
2006), 70–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2006.03.013
Bart Jacobs. 2017. A Recipe for State-and-Effect Triangles. Logical Methods in Computer Science 13 (03 2017). https:
//doi.org/10.23638/LMCS-13(2:6)2017
Ohad Kammar, Sam Lindley, and Nicolas Oury. 2013. Handlers in Action. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Functional Programming (Boston, Massachusetts, USA) (ICFP ’13). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 145–158. https://doi.org/10.1145/2500365.2500590
Oleg Kiselyov, Shin-cheng Mu, and Amr Sabry. 2021. Not by equations alone: Reasoning with extensible effects. Journal of
Functional Programming 31 (2021), e2. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0956796820000271
Daan Leijen. 2017. Type Directed Compilation of Row-Typed Algebraic Effects. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Paris, France) (POPL 2017). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 486–499. https://doi.org/10.1145/3009837.3009872
Paul Blain Levy. 2003. Call-By-Push-Value. Number 1. Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-0954-6
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 29 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:29
Žiga Lukšič and Matija Pretnar. 2020. Local algebraic effect theories. Journal of Functional Programming 30 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0956796819000212
Saunders Mac Lane. 1998. Categories for the Working Mathematician, 2nd edn . Springer, Berlin. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4757-4721-8
Michael Mislove, Joël Ouaknine, and James Worrell. 2004. Axioms for Probability and Nondeterminism. Electronic Notes
in Theoretical Computer Science 96 (2004), 7 – 28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2004.04.019 Proceedings of the 10th
International Workshop on Expressiveness in Concurrency.
Eugenio Moggi. 1991. Notions of computation and monads. Information and Computation 93, 1 (1991), 55 – 92. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(91)90052-4 Selections from 1989 IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science.
Koen Pauwels, Tom Schrijvers, and Shin-Cheng Mu. 2019. Handling Local State with Global State. InMathematics of Program
Construction, Graham Hutton (Ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 18–44. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
33636-3_2
Maciej Piróg, Tom Schrijvers, Nicolas Wu, and Mauro Jaskelioff. 2018. Syntax and semantics for operations with scopes.
Proceedings - Symposium on Logic in Computer Science 1 (2018), 809–818. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209166
Gordon Plotkin and John Power. 2002. Notions of Computation Determine Monads. In Foundations of Software Science
and Computation Structures, Mogens Nielsen and Uffe Engberg (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
342–356. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45931-6_24
Gordon Plotkin and John Power. 2003. Algebraic Operations and Generic Effects. Applied Categorical Structures 11, 1 (2003),
69–94. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023064908962
Gordon Plotkin and John Power. 2004. Computational Effects and Operations: An Overview. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput.
Sci. 73 (10 2004), 149–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2004.08.008
G. Plotkin and M. Pretnar. 2008. A Logic for Algebraic Effects. In 2008 23rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
Science. 118–129. https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS.2008.45
Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. 2009. Handlers of Algebraic Effects. In Programming Languages and Systems , Giuseppe
Castagna (Ed.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 80–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00590-9_7
Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. 2013. Handling Algebraic Effects. Logical Methods in Computer Science 9, 4 (Dec 2013).
https://doi.org/10.2168/lmcs-9(4:23)2013
Matija Pretnar. 2010. Logic and handling of algebraic effects . Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Edinburgh, UK.
Tom Schrijvers, Maciej Piróg, Nicolas Wu, and Mauro Jaskelioff. 2019. Monad Transformers and Modular Algebraic Effects:
What Binds Them Together. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Haskell (Berlin,
Germany) (Haskell 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 98–113. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3331545.3342595
Philipp Schuster, Jonathan Immanuel Brachthäuser, and Klaus Ostermann. 2020. Compiling Effect Handlers in Capability-
Passing Style. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4, ICFP, Article 93 (Aug. 2020), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3408975
Willem Seynaeve, Koen Pauwels, and Tom Schrijvers. 2020. State Will do. In Trends in Functional Programming , Aleksander
Byrski and John Hughes (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 204–225. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
57761-2_10
Antal Spector-Zabusky, Joachim Breitner, Christine Rizkallah, and Stephanie Weirich. 2018. Total Haskell is Reasonable
Coq. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs (Los Angeles, CA,
USA) (CPP 2018). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 14–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3167092
Julien Tesson, Hideki Hashimoto, Zhenjiang Hu, Frédéric Loulergue, and Masato Takeichi. 2011. Program Calculation in
Coq. In Algebraic Methodology and Software Technology, Michael Johnson and Dusko Pavlovic (Eds.). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 163–179. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17796-5_10
Niki Vazou, Joachim Breitner, Rose Kunkel, David Van Horn, and Graham Hutton. 2018. Theorem Proving for All: Equational
Reasoning in Liquid Haskell (Functional Pearl). In Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium
on Haskell (St. Louis, MO, USA) (Haskell 2018). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 132–144.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3242744.3242756
Niki Vazou, Anish Tondwalkar, Vikraman Choudhury, Ryan G. Scott, Ryan R. Newton, Philip Wadler, and Ranjit Jhala.
2017. Refinement Reflection: Complete Verification with SMT. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, POPL, Article 53 (Dec. 2017),
31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3158141
Janis Voigtländer. 2008. Asymptotic Improvement of Computations over Free Monads. In Mathematics of Program Construc-
tion, Philippe Audebaud and Christine Paulin-Mohring (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 388–403.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70594-9_20
Nicolas Wu and Tom Schrijvers. 2015. Fusion for Free. In Mathematics of Program Construction , Ralf Hinze and Janis
Voigtländer (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 302–322. https://doi.org/978-3-319-19797-5_15
Ningning Xie, Jonathan Immanuel Brachthäuser, Daniel Hillerström, Philipp Schuster, and Daan Leijen. 2020. Effect
Handlers, Evidently. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4, ICFP, Article 99 (Aug. 2020), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3408981
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 30 ---
73:30 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Yizhou Zhang and Andrew C. Myers. 2019. Abstraction-Safe Effect Handlers via Tunneling. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 3,
POPL, Article 5 (Jan. 2019), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290318
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 31 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:31
A EQUATIONS IN CHURCH ENCODINGS
In the appendices, we switch to work with equations based on Church encodings , which are
equivalent to the definition of equations Section 2.1 but simply the proofs.
Definition A.1 (Equations in Chuch encodings). Given a signature Σ, types Γ and v, an equation
in Church encodings for Σ with free value variables Γ and free computation variables v is a pair of
templates:
data EquationC Σ Γ v = EqnC (Template Σ Γ v) ( Template Σ Γ v)
type Template Σ Γ v = ∀c. (Σ c → c) → Γ → ( v → c) → c
Moreover, we say that an algebraalg::Σ c → c respects an equation(EqnC lhs rhs)::EquationC Σ Γ v
if for any t :: Γ and k :: v → c,
lhs alg t k = rhs alg t k
Lemma A.1. There is an isomorphism between equations based on free monads (11) and equations
based on Church encodings.
𝜙 :: Functor Σ ⇒ Equation Σ Γ v → EquationC Σ Γ v
Moreover, an algebra alg respects an equation in Church encodings if and only if it respects the
isomorphic equation in free monads (Definition 2.1).
Proof. The isomorphism can defined as follows:
𝜙 (l ¤= r) = EqnC (𝜆alg t k → fold alg k (l t )) ( 𝜆alg t k → fold alg k (r t ))
and its inverse is
𝜙 ◦ :: Functor Σ ⇒ EquationC Σ Γ v → Equation Σ Γ v
𝜙 ◦ (EqnC l r ) = (𝜆t → l Op t Var ) ¤=(𝜆t → r Op t Var )
We refer the reader to [Hinze 2005] for the proof that 𝜙 and 𝜙 ◦ form a pair of isomorphism. An
algebra respects an equation in Church encodings iff it respects the isomorphic equation in free
monads following the definitions of equation respecting and 𝜙. □
B PROOF OF HANDLER FUSION
In this section we prove Theorem 5.3. The technique is essentially the same as the one in [Wu and
Schrijvers 2015], although the setting in their paper is slightly different from the setting of modular
handlers used in this paper.
Definition B.1. For convenience in our calculation, we divide handle in Definition 3.3 into the
following smaller functions:
split :: (Σ 1 c → c) → ( Σ 2 c → c)
→ ( Σ 1 + Σ 2) c → c
split alg 1 alg2 (Inl x ) = alg1 x
split alg 1 alg2 (Inr x ) = alg2 x
openAlg :: (Functor sig ′, MCarrier c )
⇒ MHandler Σ c a b
→ ( Σ + sig′) ( c (Free sig ′)) → c (Free sig ′)
openAlg h = split (alg h) forward
It it clear that
handle h = run h ·fold (openAlg h) ( gen h) (33)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 32 ---
73:32 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
B.1 Fold/Build fusion for free
The underlying technique for our proof is fold/build fusion for free introduced by [Hinze et al. 2011].
In this subsection, we state it in our context of free monads (Theorem B.1) and establish relevant
prerequisites (mainly Lemma B.5) to apply the free theorem.
Definition B.2. We say that a monad M is a term monad of signature Σ if there is a parametric
family of Σ-algebras con :: ∀a. Σ (M a ) → M a:
class (Monad m, Functor Σ) ⇒ TermMonad m Σ where
con :: Σ (m a) → m a
with the algebraicity law:
con op > >= k = con (fmap (> >=k) op)
Definition B.3. Given two term monads M1 and M2 of the same signature Σ, a term monad
morphism from M1 to M2 is a monad morphism f :: ∀a. M1 a → M2 a from M1 to M2 that is
simultaneously a Σ-algebra homomorphism from conM1 to conM2 for any a.
The parametricity of polymorphic functions entails the following property.
Theorem B.1 (Fusion for Free). For any function g :: TermMonad m Σ ⇒ X → m Y , term monads
M1 and M2 of Σ, and term monad morphism f :: M1 a → M2 a from M1 to M2, the following diagram
commutes:
X M1 Y
M2 Y
gM1
gM2
fY (34)
where subscripts are type applications of polymorphic functions.
Lemma B.2. Monad Free Σ is a term monad of Σ for any functor Σ:
instance Functor Σ ⇒ TermMonad (Free Σ) Σ where con = Op
Proof. As shown in Section 2, Free Σ is a monad and its > >= implementation directly entails
algebraicity. □
Remark B.1. In fact, Free Σ is the initial term monad of Σ: for any term monad m of Σ, there is
exactly one term monad morphism from Free Σ to m.
Lemma B.3. For any type c carrying a Σ-algebra alg :: Σ c → c, monad Contc is a term monad of Σ
with con = liftAlgCont alg where liftAlgCont (17) is defined in Section 5.
Proof. ContC is clearly a monad. What remains is to show that con satisfies algebraicity:
con op > >= k
= {↓ Expanding con }
liftAlgCont alg op > >= k
= {↓ Expanding liftAlgCont (17) }
Cont (𝜆q → alg (fmap (𝜆m → runCont m q ) op)) > >= k
= {↓ Expanding > >= and letting m = Cont (𝜆q → alg (fmap (𝜆n → runCont n q ) op)) }
Cont (𝜆t → runCont m (𝜆x → runCont (k x ) t))
= {↓ Expanding runCont m }
Cont (𝜆t → ( 𝜆q → alg (fmap (𝜆n → runCont n q ) op)) ( 𝜆x → runCont (k x ) t))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 33 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:33
= {↓ 𝛽-reducing }
Cont (𝜆t → alg (fmap (𝜆n → runCont n (𝜆x → runCont (k x ) t)) op))
= {↑ Definition of n > >= k }
Cont (𝜆t → alg (fmap (𝜆n → runCont (n > >= k) t) op))
= {↑ Functorial law: fmap preserves function composition }
Cont (𝜆t → alg (fmap (𝜆n → runCont n t ) ( fmap (> >=k) op)))
= {↑ Expanding liftAlgCont (17) }
liftAlgCont alg (fmap (> >=k) op
= {↑ Expanding con }
con (fmap (> >=k) op)
□
Lemma B.4. Given a modular handler h2 :: MHandler Σ2 C2 Y Z , then for any signature sig′,
ContC2 (Free sig′) is a term monad of Σ2 + sig′ with
conCPS = liftAlgCont (openAlg h2)
Proof. Because openAlg h2 have type (Σ2 + sig′) ( C2 (Free sig ′)) → C2 (Free sig ′), by
Lemma B.3, ContC2 (Free sig′) is a term monad of Σ2 + sig′. □
Lemma B.5. Given the data as in the last lemma, fold conCPS returnCont is a term monad morphism
from Free (Σ2 + sig′) to ContC2 (Free sig′) .
Proof. By the definition offold, it is clearly a (Σ2 +sig′)-homomorphism. With some calculation,
it can be shown that it is also a monad morphism. □
B.2 Handle with Term Monads
To apply Theorem B.1 to fusehandle h2 ·handle h1, we need (i)handle h1 to operate on a parametric
term monad of Σ2 + Sig′ instead of just Free (Σ2 + Sig′), and (ii) handle h2 to be factored as a term
monad morphism followed by something else.
For the first requirement, we define the following generalised version of handle:
ghandle :: (MCarrier c , Functor Σ, Functor sig ′, TermMonad m sig ′)
⇒ MHandler Σ c a b → Free (Σ + sig′) a → m b
ghandle h = run h ·fold (gopenAlg h) ( gen h)
gopenAlg :: (Functor sig ′, MCarrier c , TermMonad m sig ′)
⇒ MHandler Σ c a b → ( Σ + sig′) ( c m) → c m
gopenAlg h = split (alg h) ( fwd ·con ·fmap return)
It is clear that
(ghandle h1)Free sig′ = handle h1 (35)
Then for the second requirement, we have the following lemma.
Lemma B.6. Given h2 :: MHandler Σ2 C2 Y Z , it is the case that
fold (openAlg h2) ( gen h2) = (𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) · fold conCPS returnCont
Proof. It can be checked that(𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) is a (Σ2+sig′)-algebra homomorphism
from conCPS to openAlg h2, and then the equation can be shown by an ordinary fold fusion [Bird
and de Moor 1997; Hinze 2013]. □
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 34 ---
73:34 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Now we can use Theorem B.1 to fuse the folds of the two handlers:
handle h2 ·handle h1
= {↓ Equation 33 }
run h2 ·fold (openAlg h2) ( gen h2) · handle h1
= {↓ Equation 35 }
run h2 ·fold (openAlg h2) ( gen h2) · (ghandle h1)Free (Σ2+sig′)
= {↓ Lemma B.6 }
run h2 · (𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) · fold conCPS returnCont · (ghandle h1)Free (Σ2+sig′)
= {↓ Theorem B.1 and Lemma B.5 }
run h2 · (𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) · (ghandle h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ )
Note that in the last line we only have one fold on the syntax tree now.
Now we calculate from the side of handle (h2 ⋄ h1):
handle (h2 ⋄ h1)
= run (h2 ⋄ h1) · fold (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) ( gen (h2 ⋄ h1))
= run h2 · (𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) · run h1 ·fold (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) ( gen (h2 ⋄ h1))
= run h2 · (𝜆x → runCont x (gen h2)) · run h1 ·fold (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) ( gen h1)
(we omit constructors and destructors Fuse and unFuse for clarity). To complete the proof of
handle h2 ·handle h1 = handle (h2 ⋄ h1) · assoc◦, it is sufficient to show
(ghandle h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) = run h1 ·fold (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) ( gen h1) · assoc◦ (36)
By definition of ghandle,
(ghandle h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) = run h ·fold (gopenAlg h1)gen h (ContC2 (Free sig′) )
Thus it is sufficient to show
fold (gopenAlg h1)gen h (ContC2 (Free sig′) ) = fold (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) ( gen h1) · assoc◦ (37)
Lemma B.7. Let 𝜙 :: (Σ1 + (Σ2 + sig′)) a → (( Σ1 + Σ2) + sig′) a be the evident isomorphism between
these two signatures. We have
(gopenAlg h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) = (openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1)) · 𝜙 (38)
Proof. By case analysis on input x,
Case B.7.1. If x = Inl c,
(gopenAlg h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) (Inl c ) = alg h1 c = openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( 𝜙 (Inl c ))
Case B.7.2. If x = Inr (Inl c ),
(gopenAlg h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) (Inr (Inl c ))
= {↓ definition of gopenAlg }
(fwd ·conCPS ·fmap return) ( Inl c )
= {↓ definition of conCPS }
(fwd ·liftAlgCont (openAlg h2) · fmap return) ( Inl c )
= {↓ fmap on Inl }
(fwd ·liftAlgCont (openAlg h2)) ( Inl (fmap return c ))
= {↓ definition of liftAlgCont }
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 35 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:35
fwd (cont (𝜆k → openAlg h2 (fmap (𝜆m → runCont m k ) ( Inl (fmap return c )))))
= {↓ fmap on Inl }
fwd (cont (𝜆k → openAlg h2 (Inl (fmap (( 𝜆m → runCont m k ) · return) c))))
= {↓ definition openAlg h2 on Inl }
fwd (cont (𝜆k → alg h2 (fmap (( 𝜆m → runCont m k ) · return) c)))
= {↓ cancelling return and runCont }
fwd (cont (𝜆k → alg h2 (fmap (( 𝜆m → runCont m k ) · return) c)))
= {↑ definition of liftAlgCont }
(fwd ·liftAlgCont (alg h2) · fmap return) c
= {↑ definition of ⋄ }
alg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inr c )
= {↑ definition of openAlg }
openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inl (Inr c ))
= {↑ definition of 𝜙 }
openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( 𝜙 (Inr (Inl c )))
Case B.7.3. If x = Inr (Inr c ),
(gopenAlg h1)ContC2 (Free sig′ ) (Inr (Inr c ))
= {↓ definition of gopenAlg }
(fwd ·conCPS ·fmap return) ( Inr c )
= {↓ definition of conCPS }
(fwd · (liftAlgCont (openAlg h2)) · fmap return) ( Inr c )
= {↓ definition of liftAlgCont }
(fwd · (liftAlgCont (fwdC2 ·Op ·fmap Var)) · fmap return) c
= {↓ definition of liftAlgCont and simplification }
fwd (cont (𝜆k → ( fwdC2 ·Op) ( fmap (𝜆x → Var (k x )) c)))
= {↑ ( fmap k ·Var) = (𝜆x → Var (k x )) }
fwdC1 (cont (𝜆k → fwdC2 (Op (fmap (fmap k ·Var) c))))
= {↑ fmap preseves function composition }
fwdC1 (cont (𝜆k → fwdC2 (Op (fmap (fmap k) ( fmap Var c )))))
= {↑ fmap on Op }
fwdC1 (cont (𝜆k → fwdC2 (fmap k (Op (fmap Var c )))))
= {↑ definition of reflectEM }
(fwdC1 ·reflectEM ·Op ·fmap Var) c
= {↑ definition of fwd for Fuse }
(fwdFuse ·Op ·fmap Var) c
= {↑ definition of h2 ⋄ h1 }
openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inr c )
= {↑ definition of 𝜙 }
openAlg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( 𝜙 (Inr (Inr c )))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 36 ---
73:36 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
□
Now Equation 37 follows from this lemma by base functor fusion [Hinze 2013]. This complete
our proof of Theorem 5.3.
C CORRECT HANDLERS INDUCE CORRECT TRANSFORMATIONS
This section proves Theorem 4.1. For brevity, we will only prove for open correctness of Theo-
rem 4.1 since the case for closed correctness can be proved by replacing all occurrences of ‘for
any T ′ :: Theory sig′’ in the proof withT ′ being the empty theory. We will use functions defined
in Definition B.1, the function ghandle, and the concept of term monads (Definition B.2) from the
previous section, but the other results from the last section are not used.
Given a theory T :: Theory Σ, a model of T is a set C with an algebra Σ C → C that respects
the equations of T. It is standard [Bauer 2018; Plotkin and Power 2002] that given any set X, the
quotient set (Free Σ X )/∼𝑇 is the free model of T generated by X, and that the mapping from X to
(Free Σ X )/∼𝑇 is a monad, which we denote by monad FM Σ with
return x = [Var x ]
[return x ] > >= k = k x
[Op op ] > >= k = [Op (fmap (> >=k) op) ]
where [−] means the equivalence class that an element belongs to, instead of a list. Because ∼𝑇
is defined to be a congruence relation on Free Σ (see Definition 3.1), the above definition of > >= is
well defined. FM is clearly a term monad (Definition B.2) of Σ with con x = [Op x ]. The universal
property of FM says that given any model (C :: ∗, alg :: Σ C → C) and a function gen :: X → C,
there is a unique T-model homomorphism fold alg gen from FM X to C such that
fold alg gen [Var x ] = gen x
Additionally, for any m :: Free Σ X,
fold alg gen [m] = fold alg gen m (39)
Lemma C.1. Given a term monad M of Σ, a modular carrier C, define
forward :: (TermMonad M Σ, MCarrier C ) ⇒ Σ (C M ) → C M
forward = fwd ·con ·fmap return
then fwd :: M (C M ) → C M is a Σ-algebra homomorphism from con :: Σ (M (C M )) → M (C M )
to forward :: Σ (C M ) → C M :
fwd ·con = forward ·fmap fwd
Proof. First we define con′ :: ∀a. Σ a → M a by con′ = con ·fmap return. Conversely,
con
= {↑ join ·return = id }
con ·fmap join ·fmap return
= {↑ algebraicity of con }
join ·con ·fmap return
= join ·con′
Then we calculate
forward ·fmap fwd
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 37 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:37
= fwd ·con ·fmap return ·fmap fwd
= fwd ·con′ ·fmap fwd
= {↓ naturality of con′ }
fwd ·fmap fwd ·con′
= {↓ Eilenberg-Moore property of fwd (Equation 14) }
fwd ·join ·con′
= fwd ·con
□
Lemma C.2. Given a modular carrier C, a term monad M of Σ, if conM,a respects an equation lhs = rhs
for any a in the sense of Definition A.1, then the forward function defined in the last lemma respects
lhs = rhs too.
Proof. For any function f of type
∀c. (Σ c → c) → G → ( V → c) → c
for some G and V , if we view c and the first argument Σ c → c as a Σ-algebra, by parametricity
[Reynolds 1983; Voigtländer 2009; Wadler 1989] and Lemma C.1, given any g :: G and k :: V →
M (C M ), we have
fwd (f con g k ) = f forward g (fwd ·k) (40)
Assuming lhs and rhs has type Template G V , to prove lhs forward g k ′ = rhs forward g k ′ for any
g :: G and k′ :: V → C M , we define k = return ·k′. By the Eilenberg-Moore property of fwd, we
have k′ = fwd ·k and we calculate
lhs forward g k ′
= lhs forward g (fwd ·k)
= { Equation 40 for f := lhs }
fwd (lhs con g k )
= { assumption that con respects lhs = rhs }
fwd (rhs con g k )
= { reverse of the previous steps }
rhs forward g k ′
Then we conclude forward respects the equation lhs = rhs. □
Lemma C.3. Given h :: MHandler Σ C A B , if h is a correct open handler of theory T :: Theory Σ,
then for any sig′ and T ′ :: Theory sig′, C (FM sig ′) with
gopenAlg h :: (Σ + sig′) ( C (FM sig ′)) → C (FM sig ′)
defined as in Section B.2 is a model of T + T ′.
Proof. Because h is a correct open handler of T, C (FM sig ′) is a model of T with algebra alg h.
The monad FM sig ′ is a term monad of sig′, so Lemma C.2 implies that C (FM sig ′) with algebra
fwd ·con ·fmap return is model of T ′. By definition, equations of T + T ′ are either an equation
from T or T ′, and gopenAlg h is exactly split (alg h) ( fwd ·con ·fmap return). Thus C (FM sig ′) is
a model of T + T ′. □
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 38 ---
73:38 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
Lemma C.4. Given a handler h :: MHandler Σ C A B , two theories T :: Theory Σ and T :: Theory sig′,
if c1, c2 :: Free (Σ + sig′) A for some type A such that c1 ∼T +T ′ c2, then
fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ c1 = fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ c2
Proof. By Lemma C.3, C (FM sig ′) is a (T + T ′)-model with algebra (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′. Thus
by Equation 39, for any c :: Free (Σ + sig′) A
fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ c = fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ [c ]
Now that c1 ∼T +T ′ c2, [c1] = [c2]. Therefore,
fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ c1
= fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ [c2 ]
= fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′ c2
□
Now we are ready to prove Theorem 4.1 using parametricity [Reynolds 1983; Voigtländer 2009;
Wadler 1989]. Let h :: MHandler Σ C A B be a correct open handler of T :: Theory Σ, T ′ :: Theory sig′
be any theory, c1, c2 :: Free (Σ + sig′) A be any two computations such that c1 ∼T +T ′ c2. Because
ghandle is polymorphic in its TermMonad argument m, and [ ] :: ∀a. Free sig ′ a → FM sig ′ a is
evidently a TermMonad morphism, thus by parametricity, for any c,
[ (ghandle h1)Free sig′ c ] = (ghandle h1)FM sig ′ c (41)
Then
[handle c1 ]
= [ (ghandle h1)Free sig′ c1 ]
= (ghandle h1)FM sig ′ c1
= (( run h)FM sig ′ ·fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′) c1
= { Lemma C.4 }
(( run h)FM sig ′ ·fold (gopenAlg h)FM sig ′ (gen h)FM sig ′) c2
= { reverse of the above steps }
[handle c2 ]
Then by definition [handle c1 ] = [handle c2 ] iff. handle c1 ∼T ′ handle c2, which is what we want
to show.
D PROOFS OF PRESERVATION OF EQUATIONS
This section contains detailed calculations to prove Theorem 5.5.
Lemma D.1. For any functor Σ, types Γ, V , function f :: ∀c. (Σ c → c) → Γ → ( V → c) → c,
function alg :: Σ R → R for some type R, it holds that
f (liftAlgCont alg ) g k = Cont (𝜆q → f alg g (( 𝜆m → runCont m q ) · k))
for any g and k.
Proof. It is sufficient to show that for any type a and any q :: a → R,
runCont (f (liftAlgCont alg ) g k ) q = f alg g (( 𝜆m → runCont m q ) · k)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 39 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:39
This is a consequence of the parametricity of f because 𝜆m → runCont m q is a Σ-algebra
homomorphism from
liftAlgCont alg :: Σ (ContR a) → ContR a
liftAlgCont alg s = cont (𝜆k → alg (fmap (𝜆m → runCont m k ) s))
to alg :: Σ R → R. □
Theorem D.2 (Preservation of Equations). Suppose h1 and h2 are modular handlers of signatures
Σ1 and Σ2 respectively. If h1 and h2 are correct open (resp. closed) handlers of T1 :: Theory Σ1 and
T2 :: Theory Σ2 correspondingly, then h2 ⋄ h1 is a correct open (resp. closed) handler of T1 + T2.
Proof. By Definition 2.3, each equation EqnC lhs rhs of T1 + T2 is either an equation from T1 or
an equation from T2 lifted to signature Σ1 + Σ2. If it is from EqnC lhs′ rhs′ :: EquationC Σ1 Γ V from
T1, then
lhs, rhs :: ∀c. (( Σ1 + Σ2) c → c) → Γ → ( V → c) → c
lhs alg = lhs′ (alg ·Inl)
rhs alg = rhs′ (alg ·Inl)
Then
lhs (alg (h2 ⋄ h1)) = rhs (alg (h2 ⋄ h1))
⇔ lhs′ (alg (h2 ⋄ h1) · Inl) = rhs′ (alg (h2 ⋄ h1) · Inl)
⇔ { definition of alg (h2 ⋄ h1) }
lhs′ (alg h1) = lhs′ (alg h1)
The last line holds because h1 is a correct handler of lhs′ = rhs′ by assumption.
If EqnC lhs rhs is from T2, then
lhs, rhs :: ∀c. (( Σ1 + Σ2) c → c) → Γ → ( V → c) → c
lhs alg = lhs′ (alg ·Inr)
rhs alg = rhs′ (alg ·Inr)
By definition,
alg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inr op ) = (Fuse ·fwd ·liftAlgCont (alg h2) · fmap (return ·unFuse)) op
By Lemma C.2, to show that alg (h2 ⋄ h1) respects lhs = rhs, it is sufficient to show that
liftAlgCont (alg h2) :: Monad m ⇒ Σ2 (ContC2 m a) → ContC2 m a
respects lhs′ = rhs′ for any m and a. Then for any g and k,
lhs′ (liftAlgCont (alg h2)) g k
= {↓ Lemma D.1 }
Cont𝜆q→lhs′ (alg h2) g ( (𝜆m→runCont m q ) ·k)
= {↓ assumption that alg h2 respects lhs′ = rhs′ }
Cont𝜆q→rhs′ (alg h2) g ( (𝜆m→runCont m q ) ·k)
= lhs′ (liftAlgCont (alg h2)) g k
{↓ Lemma D.1 }
□
E MISCELLANEOUS CALCULATIONS
This section contains the calculations omitted in the main text. Most of them are straightforward
equational proofs.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 40 ---
73:40 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
E.1 Eilenberg-Moore Laws for the Fused Modular Carrier
In Theorem 5.2 we define the fused modular carrier to be
newtype Fuse c d m = Fuse {unFuse :: c (Contd m ) }
with the following fwd function:
instance (MCarrier c , MCarrier d ) ⇒ MCarrier (Fuse c d ) where
fwd = Fuse ·fwd ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM
reflectEM :: (MCarrier d , Monad m) ⇒ m a → Contd m a
reflectEM m = Cont (𝜆k → fwd (fmap k m ))
Here we prove that this fwd instance indeed satisfies the Eilenberg-Moore laws (14). For the first
equation fwd ·return = id in (14):
fwd (return x)
= (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse) ( reflectEM (return x))
= (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse) ( Cont (𝜆k → fwdd (fmap k (return x))))
= (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse) ( Cont (𝜆k → fwdd (return (k x )))
{↓ fwdd ·return = id }
= (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse) ( Cont (𝜆k → k x ))
= (Fuse ·fwdc) ( Cont (𝜆k → k (unFuse x )))
= (Fuse ·fwdc) ( returnCont (unFuse x ))
{↓ fwdc ·return = id }
= Fuse (unFuse x )
= x
For the second equation fwd ·fmap fwd = fwd ·join,
fwd ·fmap fwd
= Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM ·fmap (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM )
= {↓ Naturality }
Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse ·fmap (Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse) · reflectEM ·fmap reflectEM
= {↓ unFuse ·Fuse = id }
Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap (fwdc ·fmap unFuse) · reflectEM ·fmap reflectEM
= {↑ fwdc ·join = twdc ·fmap fwd c }
Fuse ·fwdc ·join ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM ·fmap reflectEM
= {↑ Naturality }
Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse ·join ·reflectEM ·fmap reflectEM
= {↑ reflectEM is a monad morphism preserving join }
Fuse ·fwdc ·fmap unFuse ·reflectEM ·join
= fwd ·join
E.2 Calculations for Clauses of Fused Handler
This subsection provides the detailed calculations for Lemma 5.6 and Lemma 5.7.
Proof of Lemma 5.6 . The clause for O1 of h2 ⋄ h1 is easy to calculate:
c1 p k
= alg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inl (O1 p k))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 41 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:41
{↓ Definition of h2 ⋄ h1 (Theorem 5.3) }
= Fuse (alg h1 (fmap unFuse (O1 p k)))
{↓ fmap on signature functors }
= Fuse (alg h1 (O1 p (unFuse ·k)))
{↑ Definition of c1 in Lemma 5.6 }
= Fuse (c1 p (unFuse ·k))
The clause for O2 needs some calculation to expand liftAlgCont:
c2 p k
= alg (h2 ⋄ h1) ( Inr (O2 p k))
= {↓ Definition of h2 ⋄ h1 (Theorem 5.3) }
liftAlgF (alg h2) ( O2 p k)
= {↓ Definition of liftAlgF (5.2) }
(Fuse ·fwd ·liftAlgCont (alg h2) · fmap (return ·unFuse)) ( O2 p k)
= (Fuse ·fwd ·liftAlgCont (alg h2)) ( O2 p (return ·unFuse ·k))
= {↓ Definition of liftAlgCont (17) }
Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → alg h2 (fmap (𝜆m → runCont m t ) ( O2 p (return ·unFuse ·k))))))
= {↓ fmap on signature functors }
Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → alg h2 (O2 p (( 𝜆m → runCont m t ) · return ·unFuse ·k)))))
= {↓ Expanding function composition }
Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → alg h2 (O2 p (𝜆a2 → runCont (return (unFuse (k a2))) t)))))
= {↓ Expanding return and runCont (16) }
Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2))))))
Proof of Lemma 5.7 . When the modular carrier c of the first handler is FreeEM W for some
type W , we can simplify c2:
c2 p k
= Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2))))))
= {↓ Definition of fwd for FreeEM (Example 3.5) }
Fuse (FreeEM ·join ·fmap unFreeEM (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2))))))
= {↓ fmap of Cont · }
Fuse (FreeEM (join (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFreeEM (unFuse (k a2))))))))
= {↓ join of Cont · }
Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → runCont (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 →
t (unFreeEM (unFuse (k a2)))))) ( 𝜆x → runCont x q ))))
= {↓ Eliminating runCont }
Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → c2 p (𝜆a2 → ( 𝜆x → runCont x q )
(unFreeEM (unFuse (k a2)))))))
= Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → c2 p (𝜆a2 → runCont (unFreeEM (unFuse (k a2))) q))))
= {↓ Letting k′ = runCont ·unFreeEM ·unFuse ·k }
Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → c2 p (𝜆a2 → k′ a2 q))))
Similarly, when the modular carrier is StateC S W for some S and W , we can simplify c2 by
c2 p k
= Fuse (fwd (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2))))))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 42 ---
73:42 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
= {↓ Definition of fwd for StateC (Example 3.6) }
let mc = Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 → t (unFuse (k a2))))
in Fuse (StateC (𝜆s → ( do {f ← mc; unStateC f s })))
= {↓ Expanding > >= for Cont }
Fuse (StateC (𝜆s → Cont (𝜆q → runCont (Cont (𝜆t → c2 p (𝜆a2 →
t (unFuse (k a2))))) ( 𝜆f → runCont (unStateC f s ) q)))
= {↓ Applying functions }
Fuse (StateC (𝜆s → Cont (𝜆q → c2 p (𝜆a2 →
runCont (unStateC (unFuse (k a2)) s) q)))
= {↓ Letting k′ a2 s = runCont (unStateC (unFuse (k a2)) s) }
Fuse (StateC (𝜆s → Cont (𝜆q → c2 p (𝜆a2 → k′ a2 s q))))
E.3 Local State Semantics from the Tensor
The following is the proof for our claim in Remark 6.1 that the laws of the local state semantics from
[Pauwels et al. 2019] can be derived from the laws of the tensor of mutable state and nondeterminism.
The laws in [Pauwels et al. 2019] are
m > >= (\_ → fail) = fail (42)
m > >= (𝜆x → f1 x ⊓ f2 x) = (m > >= f1) ⊓ ( m > >= f2) (43)
where m ranges over computations in the combined theory. The first equation includes a nullary
operation fail that fails a branch of nondeterminism subject to the equations
fail ⊓ m = fail m ⊓ fail = fail (44)
which we did not include in the theory of nondeterminism in this paper. But this is easily fixable:
ndetH can be extended to handle fail by returning an empty set, and it can be verified to respect
the laws of fail. In the following, we show that for any m :: Free (States + NDet) a, (42) and (43)
hold when applying handle h to both sides of the equations, for any handler h that is correct for
the tensor States ⊗ NDet and any m :: Free (States + NDet) a.
For (42), we prove by induction on m: if m is Var x for some x, Var x > >= \_ → fail = fail holds
directly. If m is O p k for some O, p and k, and if O is an operation from States,
handle h (O p k > >= \_ → fail)
= handle h (do {O p k ; fail })
= {↓ Handler h respects the tensor of NDet and States }
handle h (do {x ← fail; O p k ; return x })
= {↓ fail is a nullary operation }
handle h fail
If O is an operation from NDet, the calculation above still holds because fail is commutative with
any operations of NDet following the laws (44).
For (43), we also prove by induction on m: if m is Var x for some x,
m > >= (𝜆x → f1 x ⊓ f2 x)
= Var x > >= (𝜆x → f1 x ⊓ f2 x)
= f1 x ⊓ f2 x
= (m > >= f1) ⊓ ( m > >= f2)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 43 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:43
if m is some O p k and if O is from States,
handle h (m > >= (𝜆x → f1 x ⊓ f2 x))
= handle h (O p k > >= (𝜆x → f1 x ⊓ f2 x))
= handle h (O p (𝜆a → f1 (k a) ⊓ f2 (k a)))
= {↓ The commutativity of state operation O and ⊓ }
handle h (O p (f1 ·k) ⊓ O p (f2 ·k))
= handle h (( m > >= f1) ⊓ ( m > >= f2))
Additionally, the calculation above still holds when O is some operation from NDet because ⊓ is
commutative with any operation of NDet following the laws of NDet.
E.4 Correctness for the Global State Semantics
The following is a proof for the claim in Remark 6.2 that the composite handler st s ⋄ ndetH is a
correct closed handler of the global state semantics from [Pauwels et al. 2019]. In the put-or law,
(Put s (𝜆() → m)) ⊓ n = Put s (𝜆() → m ⊓ n) (45)
Operation Put is from the second handler st s, and the modular carrier of first handler ndetH is
FreeEM. Thus by Lemma 5.7, the clause for Put of st s ⋄ ndetH is
cput p2 k
= Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → cput p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a2 q))))
{↓ cput is the clause for Put of stH }
= Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ () q) p2)
where k′ = runCont ·unFreeEM ·unFuse ·k. And the clause for (⊓), i.e. Coin is
ccoin () k = Fuse (FreeEM (do l1 ← unFreeEM (unFuse (k True))
l2 ← unFreeEM (unFuse (k False))
return (l1 ∪ l2)))
For any m, n, plugging in cput and ccoin in (45) gives
(Put s (𝜆() → n)) ⊓ m
= ccoin () ( 𝜆b → if b then cput s (𝜆() → m) else n)
= Fuse (FreeEM (do l1 ← unFusedEM (unFuse (cput s (𝜆() → m)))
l2 ← unFreeEM (unFuse n)
return (l1 ∪ l2)))
{↓ Letting m′ = unFreeEM (unFuse m) and n′ = unFreeEM (unFuse n) }
= Fuse (FreeEM (do l1 ← Cont (𝜆q → StateC (\_ → unStateC (runCont m ′ q) s))
l2 ← n′
return (l1 ∪ l2)))
= {↓ Expanding do-notation for Cont }
Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆t → StateC (\_ → unStateC (m′ (𝜆l1 → n′ (𝜆l2 → t (l1 ∪ l2)))) s))))
{↑ Expanding do-notation for Cont }
= Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆t → StateC (\_ → unStateC (
runCont (unFreeEM (unFuse (do {l1 ← m′; l2 ← n′; return (l1 ∪ l2) }))) t) s))))
= {↑ Expanding ccoin }
Fuse (FreeEM (Cont (𝜆t → StateC (\_ → unStateC (
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 44 ---
73:44 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
runCont (unFreeEM (unFuse (ccoin () ( 𝜆b → if b then m else n)))) t) s))))
= {↑ Exanpanding cput }
cput s (𝜆() → ccoin () ( 𝜆b → if b then m else n))
= Put s (𝜆() → m ⊓ n)
This establishes (45).
E.5 Correctness of the Writer Handler
Lemma E.1. Handler wtH in Section 6.2 is a correct open handler of the theory of writer effect with
equation wtAdd.
Proof. The accumulation law (see Section 6.2) can be formalised by
wtAdd :: Monoid w ⇒ EquationC (Writer w ) ( w, w) ()
wtAdd = EqnC lhs rhs where
lhs alg (w1, w2) k = alg (Tell w1 (𝜆() → alg (Tell w2 k)))
rhs alg (w1, w2) k = alg (Tell (w1 ⋄ w2) k)
Let lhs and rhs be the two sides of the equation, w1, w2 :: w and k :: () → FreeEM (a, w) m, then
lhs (alg wtH ) ( w1, w2) k
= {↓ definition of lhs }
alg wtH (Tell w1 (alg wtH (Tell w2 (k ()))))
= {↓ definition of alg wtH on Tell }
alg wtH (Tell w1 (FreeEM (do { (a, w) ← unFreeEM (k ())
return (a, w2 ⋄ w) })))
= {↓ definition of alg wtH on Tell }
FreeEM (do { (b, u) ← ( do { (a, w) ← unFreeEM (k ())
return (a, w2 ⋄ w) })
return (b, w1 ⋄ u) })
= {↓ monadic properties }
FreeEM (do { (a, w) ← unFreeEM (k ())
return (a, w1 ⋄ (w2 ⋄ w)) })
= {↓ monoid law: w1 ⋄ (w2 ⋄ w) = (w1 ⋄ w2) ⋄ w }
alg wtH (Tell (w1 ⋄ w2) ( k ()))
= {↑ definition of rhs }
rhs (alg wtH ) ( w1, w2) k
□
Theorem E.2 (Theorem 6.6). Both stH s ⋄ wtH and wtH ⋄ stH are correct open handlers of the tensor
of mutable state and writer.
Proof. Following Theorem 6.5, wtH ⋄ stH s is a correct open handler of the tensor. To show that
stH s ⋄ wtH is correct, we apply Corollary 6.2. For op1 = Tell and op2 = Put, we have
c′
1 p k = runCont (unFreeEM (c1 p (FreeEM ·Cont ·k))) {↓ definition of c1 }
= runCont (do { (a, u) ← Cont (k ()) ; return (a, p ⋄ u) })
{↓ definition of > >= for the continuation monad }
= 𝜆q → k () ( 𝜆(a, u) → q (a, p ⋄ u))
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 45 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:45
c2 p k = StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k ()) p)
and we establish (21) by the following calculation:
c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → ( 𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → k′ a1 a2 q))) {↓ expanding c2 }
= c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → ( 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ a1 () q) p2))) {↓ expanding c1 }
= 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (k′ () () ( 𝜆(a, u) → q (a, p1 ⋄ u))) p2) {↑ expanding c1 }
= 𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → unStateC (c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 ()) q) p2) {↑ expanding c2 }
= 𝜆q → c2 p2 (𝜆a2 → c′
1 p1 (𝜆a1 → k′ a1 a2) q)
For op1 = Tell and op2 = Get, we can similarly show that both sides of Equation 21 are equal to
𝜆q → StateC (𝜆s → k′ () s (𝜆(a, u) → q (a, p1 ⋄ u)) s)
By Corollary 6.2 we conclude that stH s ⋄ wtH correctly handles the tensor. □
F A SIMPLE LANGUAGE FOR MODULAR HANDLERS
This section shows a fine-grained call-by-value [Levy 2003] language 𝜆𝑀 with effect handlers, its
type system, and a denotational semantics based on the constructions discussed in this paper. The
language is similar to the language coreEff in [Bauer and Pretnar 2015] except that the type system
of 𝜆𝑀 requires handlers to work polymorphically in unhandled operations, so handlers in 𝜆𝑀 are
always modular handlers.
F.1 Abstract Syntax
Let 𝑚, 𝑛, 𝑝, 𝑘, 𝑥, and 𝑦 range over a set of variables, and op range over a set of operation symbols.
The types of 𝜆𝑀 are split into computation types and value types, and a subset of value types are
ground types, which does not contain functions and handlers.
Ground types 𝐺, 𝑃 F ⨿𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐺𝑖 | Π𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐺𝑖
Value types 𝐴, 𝐵F 𝐺 | 𝐴 → 𝐶 | 𝐴 ⇒Σ 𝐵 | ⨿ 𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 | Π𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖
Computation types 𝐶, 𝐷 F 𝑀 𝐴
Effects 𝑀 F FΣ | 𝑚
Signatures ΣF {op𝑖 : 𝑃 → 𝐺 }𝑖 ∈𝐼
where the index set 𝐼 is always finite. Note that when 𝐼 is the empty set, the product type Π{} can
be used as the unit type and the coproduct type ⨿{} can be used as the empty type. Therefore we
do not need these base types in the language.
The terms of 𝜆𝑀 are split into two syntactic categories: pure values and potentially effectful
computations:
Values 𝑣 F 𝑥 | inj𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝑣 | ⟨ 𝑣𝑖 ⟩𝑖 ∈𝐼 | 𝜆𝑥 :𝐴. 𝑐
| HdlΣ{val 𝑥 ↦→ 𝑐 | ( op 𝑝 𝑘 ↦→ 𝑐)op∈Σ}
Computations 𝑐 F val 𝑣 | op 𝑣 (𝑦. 𝑐 ) | with 𝑣 handle 𝑐 | 𝑣 𝑣
| let 𝑥 = 𝑐 in 𝑐 | match 𝑒 as {⟨𝑥𝑖 ⟩𝑖 ∈𝐼 ↦→ 𝑐}
| match 𝑒 as {inj𝑖 𝑥𝑖 ↦→ 𝑐𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼
F.2 Type System
Let Γ range over finite maps from variables to value types and Δ be finite set of variables. We
say a type is well-formed under Δ if all effect variables 𝑚 in the type are contained in Δ, and
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 46 ---
73:46 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
well-formedness is signified by judgements
Δ ⊢ 𝐴 and Δ ⊢ 𝐶
for both value types and computation types. We also have two typing judgements:
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝐴 Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑐 : 𝐶
where 𝐴, 𝐶 and Γ(𝑥) for each 𝑥 ∈ dom(Γ) are well-formed under Δ. The typing rules for values
types are the following:
(𝑥 : 𝐴) ∈ Γ
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑥 : 𝐴
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑥 : 𝐴 𝑗
Δ | Γ ⊢ inj𝑗 𝑣 : ⨿𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑥𝑖 : 𝐴𝑖 for each 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼
Δ | Γ ⊢ ⟨𝑥𝑖 ⟩𝑖 ∈𝐼 : Π𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖
Δ | Γ, 𝑥 : 𝐴 ⊢ 𝑐 : 𝐶 𝑥 ∉ dom(Γ)
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝜆𝑥 :𝐴. 𝑐 : 𝐴 → 𝐶
𝑚 ∉ Δ 𝑥 ∉ dom(Γ) { 𝑝𝑖, 𝑘 𝑖 }op𝑖 ∈Σ ∩ dom(Γ) = ∅
Δ, 𝑚 | Γ, 𝑥 : 𝐴 ⊢ 𝑐0 : 𝑚 𝐵

Δ, 𝑚 | Γ, 𝑝 𝑖 : 𝑃𝑖, 𝑘 𝑖 : (𝐴𝑖 → 𝑚 𝐵 ) ⊢ 𝑐𝑖 : 𝑚 𝐵

(op𝑖 :𝑃𝑖 →𝐴𝑖 ) ∈Σ
Δ | Γ ⊢ HdlΣ{val 𝑥 ↦→ 𝑐0 | ( op𝑖 𝑝𝑖 𝑘𝑖 ↦→ 𝑐𝑖 )op𝑖 ∈Σ} : 𝐴 ⇒Σ 𝐵
T -Hdl
and the typing rules for computations are
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝐴
Δ | Γ ⊢ val 𝑣 : 𝑀 𝐴
T -Ret
(op : 𝑃 → 𝐴) ∈ Σ Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝑃 Δ | Γ, 𝑦 : 𝐴 ⊢ 𝑐 : FΣ 𝐵
Δ | Γ ⊢ op 𝑣 (𝑦. 𝑐 ) : FΣ 𝐵
T -Op
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝐴 ⇒Σ 𝐵 Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑐 : FΣ′ 𝐴
Δ | Γ ⊢ with 𝑣 handle 𝑐 : FΣ′\Σ 𝐵
T -With
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣1 : 𝐴 → 𝐶 Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣2 : 𝐴
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣1 𝑣2 : 𝐶
T -App
𝑥 ∉ dom(Γ) Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑐1 : 𝑀 𝐴 Δ | Γ, 𝑥 : 𝐴 ⊢ 𝑐2 : 𝑀 𝐵
Δ | Γ ⊢ let 𝑥 = 𝑐1 in 𝑐2 : 𝑀 𝐵
T -Bind
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : Π𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 {𝑥𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 ∩ dom(Γ) = ∅ Δ | Γ, (𝑥𝑖 : 𝐴𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 ⊢ 𝑐 : 𝐶
Δ | Γ ⊢ match 𝑣 as {⟨𝑥𝑖 ⟩𝑖 ∈𝐼 ↦→ 𝑐} : 𝐶
Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : ⨿𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 {𝑥𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 ∩ dom(Γ) = ∅  Δ | Γ, 𝑥𝑖 : 𝐴𝑖 ⊢ 𝑐𝑖 : 𝐶
𝑖 ∈𝐼
Δ | Γ ⊢ match 𝑣 as {inj𝑖 𝑥𝑖 ↦→ 𝑐𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 : 𝐶
F.3 Denotational Semantics
In the following we show a denotational semantics of 𝜆𝑀 by translating typing derivations to
Haskell functions. As we mentioned in Section 2, we meant to use Haskell as a total language
denoting constructions around the category of sets. Thus the translation can be understood as a
set-theoretic semantics of 𝜆𝑀.
Denotation of Types. Assuming there is an injective map 𝜌 from variables in 𝜆𝑀 to Haskell
type variables of kind ∗ → ∗ . For any well-formed type 𝐴 or 𝐶 under Δ, its semantics is a Haskell
type J 𝐴 K𝜌 or J 𝐶 K𝜌, in which variables in { 𝜌 (𝑚) | 𝑚 ∈ Δ } may occur freely. (Categorically, the
meaning of a type is a profunctor (Mnd|Δ |)op × Mnd |Δ | → Set where Mnd |Δ | is the |Δ|-fold product
category of the category of set monads).
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 47 ---
Reasoning about Effect Interaction by Fusion 73:47
Unsurprisingly, the product type Π denotes tuples in Haskell: J Π𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 K𝜌 = (J 𝐴𝑖 K𝜌 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 . Coprod-
uct types ⨿ denotes finite coproducts of Haskell types too, but Haskell does not have a syntax for
nameless finite coproducts, so we translate J ⨿𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 K𝜌 into a datatype declaration:
data T = (Inj𝑖 J 𝐴𝑖 K𝜌 )𝑖 ∈𝐼
where T is a fresh name in the translation. Function types𝐴 → 𝐶 denotes functions J 𝐴 K𝜌 → J 𝐶 K𝜌.
Signatures Σ denote signature functors as in Section 2.1:
data S x =

Op𝑖 J 𝑃𝑖 K𝜌 (J 𝐴𝑖 K𝜌 → x)

(op𝑖 :𝑃𝑖 →𝐴𝑖 ) ∈Σ
where S and Op𝑖 are fresh names for the translation. Handler types 𝐴 ⇒Σ 𝐵 denotes the datatype
MHandler J Σ K𝜌 (FreeEM J 𝐵 K𝜌 ) J 𝐴 K𝜌 J 𝐵 K𝜌
of modular handlers described in Section 3.3. For computations,J FΣ 𝐴 K𝜌 is preciselyFree J Σ K𝜌 J 𝐴 K𝜌,
and J 𝑚 𝐴 K𝜌 is 𝜌 (𝑚) J 𝐴 K𝜌.
Denotation of Terms. Given a context Γ mapping to well-formed types under Δ, its meaning
J Γ K𝜌 is the product type of the meaning of the types that Γ mapped to. Then the meaning of a
typing derivation Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑣 : 𝐴 or Δ | Γ ⊢ 𝑐 : 𝐶 is some Haskell function of type
∀(𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ. (Monad 𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ ⇒ J Γ K𝜌 → J 𝐴 K𝜌
or
∀(𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ. (Monad 𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ ⇒ J Γ K𝜌 → J 𝐶 K𝜌
For most cases in the type system, their meanings are standard (see for example [Levy 2003] and
[Bauer and Pretnar 2015]), thus we only describe the non-standard cases here:
• For rule T -Hdl, the meaning of a handler valueJ HdlΣ{val 𝑥 ↦→ 𝑐0 | ( op𝑖 𝑝𝑖 𝑘𝑖 ↦→ 𝑐𝑖 )op𝑖 ∈Σ} K𝜌
is a function f of type
∀(𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ. (Monad 𝜌 (𝑚))𝑚 ∈Δ
⇒ J Γ K𝜌 → MHandler J Σ K𝜌 (FreeEM J 𝐵 K𝜌 ) J 𝐴 K𝜌 J 𝐵 K𝜌
defined by
f g = MHandler {gen = (𝜆a → J 𝑐0 K𝜌 (g, a))
, alg = (𝜆x → case x of { (Opi p k) → J 𝑐𝑖 K𝜌 (g, p, k)
; . . . })
, run = unFusedEM }
• For rule T -Ret, J 𝑀 𝐴 K𝜌 is either Free J Σ K𝜌 J 𝐴 K𝜌 or 𝜌 (𝑚) J 𝐴 K𝜌, and 𝜌 (𝑚) is given a monad
constraint when defining the meaning of val 𝑣. Thus we can interpret val 𝑣 by the return of
J 𝑀 K𝜌:
J val 𝑣 K𝜌 𝑔 = return (J 𝑣 K𝜌 𝑔)
• For rule T -Bind, it is interpreted by > >= of J 𝑀 K𝜌:
J let 𝑥 = 𝑐1 in 𝑐2 K𝜌 𝑔 = (J 𝑐1 K𝜌 𝑔) > >= (curry (J 𝑐2 K𝜌 𝑔))
• For rule T -Op, it is interpreted by the Op constructor of the free monad Free:
J op 𝑣 (𝑦. 𝑐 ) K𝜌 𝑔 = Op (J 𝑣 K𝜌 𝑔) ( 𝜆𝑦 → J 𝑐 K𝜌 (𝑔, 𝑦))
• For rule T -With, it is interpreted by the handle function in Section 3:
J with 𝑣 handle 𝑐 K𝜌 𝑔 = handle (J 𝑣 K𝜌 𝑔) ( J 𝑐 K𝜌 𝑔)
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.

--- PDF page 48 ---
73:48 Zhixuan Yang and Nicolas Wu
REFERENCES
Andrej Bauer. 2018. What is algebraic about algebraic effects and handlers? arXiv:1807.05923 [cs.LO] https://arxiv.org/abs/
1807.05923
Richard Bird and Oege de Moor. 1997. Algebra of Programming. London.
Ralf Hinze. 2005. THEORETICAL PEARL Church numerals, twice! Journal of Functional Programming 15, 1 (2005), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0956796804005313
Ralf Hinze. 2013. Adjoint folds and unfolds—An extended study. Science of Computer Programming 78, 11 (2013), 2108 –
2159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2012.07.011
Ralf Hinze, Thomas Harper, and Daniel W. H. James. 2011. Theory and Practice of Fusion. InImplementation and Application
of Functional Languages, Jurriaan Hage and Marco T. Morazán (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
19–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24276-2_2
Koen Pauwels, Tom Schrijvers, and Shin-Cheng Mu. 2019. Handling Local State with Global State. InMathematics of Program
Construction, Graham Hutton (Ed.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 18–44. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
33636-3_2
Gordon Plotkin and John Power. 2002. Notions of Computation Determine Monads. In Foundations of Software Science
and Computation Structures, Mogens Nielsen and Uffe Engberg (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
342–356. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45931-6_24
John C. Reynolds. 1983. Types, Abstraction and Parametric Polymorphism. In Information Processing 83, Proceedings of the
IFIP 9th World Computer Congress, Paris, France, September 19-23, 1983 , R. E. A. Mason (Ed.). North-Holland/IFIP, 513–523.
Janis Voigtländer. 2009. Free theorems involving type constructor classes. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 44, 9 (2009), 173–184.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1631687.1596577
Philip Wadler. 1989. Theorems for free!. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Functional programming
languages and computer architecture - FPCA ’89 , Vol. 19. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 347–359. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/99370.99404
Nicolas Wu and Tom Schrijvers. 2015. Fusion for Free. In Mathematics of Program Construction , Ralf Hinze and Janis
Voigtländer (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 302–322. https://doi.org/978-3-319-19797-5_15
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. ICFP, Article 73. Publication date: August 2021.